
     Hosts have been known at that dread sound to yield,
     And, Douglas dead, his name hath won the field.
                                               JOHN HOME.


It was at the close of an early spring day, when nature, in a cold
province of Scotland, was reviving from her winter's sleep, and the air
at least, though not the vegetation, gave promise of an abatement of
the rigour of the season, that two travellers, whose appearance at that
early period sufficiently announced their wandering character, which,
in general, secured a free passage even through a dangerous country,
were seen coming from the south-westward, within a few miles of the
Castle of Douglas, and seemed to be holding their course in the
direction of the river of that name, whose dale afforded a species of
approach to that memorable feudal fortress. The stream, small in
comparison to the extent of its fame, served as a kind of drain to the
country in its neighbourhood, and at the same time afforded the means
of a rough road to the castle and village. The high lords to whom the
castle had for ages belonged, might, had they chosen, have made this
access a great deal smoother and more convenient; but there had been as
yet little or no exercise for those geniuses, who have taught all the
world that it is better to take the more circuitous road round the base
of a hill, than the direct course of ascending it on the one side, and
descending it directly on the other, without yielding a single step to
render the passage more easy to the traveller; still less were those
mysteries dreamed of which M'Adam has of late days expounded. But,
indeed, to what purpose should the ancient Douglasses have employed his
principles, even if they had known them in ever so much perfection?
Wheel-carriages, except of the most clumsy description, and for the
most simple operations of agriculture, were totally unknown. Even the
most delicate female had no resource save a horse, or, in case of sore
infirmity, a litter. The men used their own sturdy limbs, or hardy
horses, to transport themselves from place to place; and travellers,
females in particular, experienced no small inconvenience from the
rugged nature of the country. A swollen torrent sometimes crossed their
path, and compelled them to wait until the waters had abated their
frenzy. The bank of a small river was occasionally torn away by the
effects of a thunder-storm, a recent inundation, or the like
convulsions of nature; and the wayfarer relied upon his knowledge of
the district, or obtained the best local information in his power, how
to direct his path so as to surmount such untoward obstacles.

The Douglas issues from an amphitheatre of mountains which bounds the
valley to the south-west, from whose contributions, and the aid of
sudden storms, it receives its scanty supplies. The general aspect of
the country is that of the pastoral hills of the south of Scotland,
forming, as is usual, bleak and wild farms, many of which had, at no
great length of time from the date of the story, been covered with
trees; as some of them still attest by bearing the name of _shaw_, that
is, wild natural wood. The neighbourhood of the Douglas water itself
was flat land, capable of bearing strong crops of oats and rye,
supplying the inhabitants with what they required of these productions.
At no great distance from the edge of the river, a few special spots
excepted, the soil capable of agriculture was more and more mixed with
the pastoral and woodland country, till both terminated in desolate and
partly inaccessible moorlands.

Above all, it was war-time, and of necessity all circumstances of mere
convenience were obliged to give way to a paramount sense of danger;
the inhabitants, therefore, instead of trying to amend the paths which
connected them with other districts, were thankful that the natural
difficulties which surrounded them rendered it unnecessary to break up
or to fortify the access from more open countries. Their wants, with a
very few exceptions, were completely supplied, as we have already said,
by the rude and scanty produce of their own mountains and _holms_,
[Footnote: Holms, or flat plains, by the sides of the brooks and
rivers, termed in the south, _Ings_.] the last of which served for the
exercise of their limited agriculture, while the better part of the
mountains and forest glens produced pasture for their herds and flocks.
The recesses of the unexplored depths of these sylvan retreats being
seldom disturbed, especially since the lords of the district had laid
aside, during this time of strife, their constant occupation of
hunting, the various kinds of game had increased of late very
considerably; so that not only in crossing the rougher parts of the
hilly and desolate country we are describing, different varieties of
deer were occasionally seen, but even the wild cattle peculiar to
Scotland sometimes showed themselves, and other animals, which
indicated the irregular and disordered state of the period. The
wild-cat was frequently surprised in the dark ravines or the swampy
thickets; and the wolf, already a stranger to the more populous
districts of the Lothians, here maintained his ground against the
encroachments of man, and was still himself a terror to those by whom
he was finally to be extirpated. In winter especially, and winter was
hardly yet past, these savage animals were wont to be driven to
extremity for lack of food, and used to frequent, in dangerous numbers,
the battle-field, the deserted churchyard--nay, sometimes the abodes of
living men, there to watch for children, their defenceless prey, with
as much familiarity as the fox now-a-days will venture to prowl near
the mistress's [Footnote: The good dame, or wife of a respectable
farmer, is almost universally thus designated in Scotland.]
poultry-yard.

From what we have said, our readers, if they have made--as who in these
days has not--the Scottish tour, will be able to form a tolerably just
idea of the wilder and upper part of Douglas Dale, during the earlier
period of the fourteenth century. The setting sun cast his gleams along
a moorland country, which to the westward broke into larger swells,
terminating in the mountains called the Larger and Lesser Cairntable.
The first of these is, as it were, the father of the hills in the
neighbourhood, the source of an hundred streams, and by far the largest
of the ridge, still holding in his dark bosom, and in the ravines with
which his sides are ploughed, considerable remnants of those ancient
forests with which all the high grounds of that quarter were once
covered, and particularly the hills, in which the rivers--both those
which run to the east, and those which seek the west to discharge
themselves into the Solway---hide, like so many hermits, their original
and scanty sources.

The landscape was still illuminated by the reflection of the evening
sun, sometimes thrown back from pool or stream; sometimes resting on
grey rocks, huge cumberers of the soil, which labour and agriculture
have since removed, and sometimes contenting itself with gilding the
banks of the stream, tinged, alternately grey, green, or ruddy, as the
ground itself consisted of rock, or grassy turf, or bare earthen mound,
or looked at a distance like a rampart of dark red porphyry.
Occasionally, too, the eye rested on the steep brown extent of moorland
as the sunbeam glanced back from the little tarn or mountain pool,
whose lustre, like that of the eye in the human countenance, gives a
life and vivacity to every feature around.

The elder and stouter of the two travellers whom we have mentioned, was
a person well, and even showily dressed, according to the finery of the
times, and bore at his back, as wandering minstrels were wont, a case,
containing a small harp, rote or viol, or some such species of musical
instrument for accompanying the voice. The leathern case announced so
much, although it proclaimed not the exact nature of the instrument.
The colour of the traveller's doublet was blue, and that of his hose
violet, with slashes which showed a lining of the same colour with the
jerkin. A mantle ought, according to ordinary custom, to have covered
this dress; but the heat of the sun, though the season was so early,
had induced the wearer to fold up his cloak in small compass, and form
it into a bundle, attached to the shoulders like the military greatcoat
of the infantry soldier of the present day. The neatness with which it
was made up, argued the precision of a practised traveller, who had
been long accustomed to every resource which change of weather
required. A great profusion of narrow ribands or points, constituting
the loops with which our ancestors connected their doublet and hose,
formed a kind of cordon, composed of knots of blue or violet, which
surrounded the traveller's person, and thus assimilated in colour with
the two garments which it was the office of these strings to combine.
The bonnet usually worn with this showy dress, was of that kind with
which Henry the Eighth and his son, Edward the Sixth, are usually
represented. It was more fitted, from the gay stuff of which it was
composed, to appear in a public place, than to encounter a storm of
rain. It was party-coloured, being made of different stripes of blue
and violet; and the wearer arrogated a certain degree of gentility to
himself, by wearing a plume of considerable dimensions of the same
favourite colours. The features over which this feather drooped were in
no degree remarkable for peculiarity of expression. Yet in so desolate
a country as the west of Scotland, it would, not have been easy to pass
the man without more minute attention than he would have met with where
there was more in the character of the scenery to arrest the gaze of
the passengers.

A quick eye, a sociable look, seeming to say, "Ay, look at me, I am a
man worth noticing, and not unworthy your attention," carried with it,
nevertheless, an interpretation which might be thought favourable or
otherwise, according to the character of the person whom the traveller
met. A knight or soldier would merely have thought that he had met a
merry fellow, who could sing a wild song, or tell a wild tale, and help
to empty a flagon, with all the accomplishments necessary for a boon
companion at an hostelry, except perhaps an alacrity at defraying his
share of the reckoning. A churchman, on the other hand, might have
thought he of the blue and violet was of too loose habits, and
accustomed too little to limit himself within the boundaries of
beseeming mirth, to be fit society for one of his sacred calling. Yet
the Man of Song had a certain steadiness of countenance, which seemed
fitted to hold place in scenes of serious business as well as of
gaiety. A wayfaring passenger of wealth (not at that time a numerous
class) might have feared in him a professional robber, or one whom
opportunity was very likely to convert into such; a female might have
been apprehensive of uncivil treatment; and a youth, or timid person,
might have thought of murder, or such direful doings. Unless privately
armed, however, the minstrel was ill-accoutred for any dangerous
occupation. His only visible weapon was a small crooked sword, like
what we now call a hanger; and the state of the times would have
justified any man, however peaceful his intentions, in being so far
armed against the perils of the road.

If a glance at this man had in any respect prejudiced him in the
opinion of those whom he met on his journey, a look at his companion
would, so far as his character could be guessed at--for he was closely
muffled up--have passed for an apology and warrant for his associate.
The younger traveller was apparently in early youth, a soft and gentle
boy, whose Sclavonic gown, the appropriate dress of the pilgrim, he
wore more closely drawn about him than the coldness of the weather
seemed to authorize or recommend. His features, imperfectly seen under
the hood of his pilgrim's dress, were prepossessing in a high degree;
and though he wore a walking sword, it seemed rather to be in
compliance with general fashion than from any violent purpose he did
so. There were traces of sadness upon his brow, and of tears upon his
cheeks; and his weariness was such, as even his rougher companion
seemed to sympathize with, while he privately participated also in the
sorrow which left its marks upon a countenance so lovely. They spoke
together, and the elder of the two, while he assumed the deferential
air proper to a man of inferior rank addressing a superior, showed in
tone and gesture, something that amounted to interest and affection.

"Bertram, my friend," said the younger of the two, "how far are we
still from Douglas Castle? We have already come farther than the twenty
miles, which thou didst say was the distance from Cammock--or how didst
thou call the last hostelry which we left by daybreak?"

"Cummock, my dearest lady--I beg ten thousand excuses--my gracious
young lord."

"Call me Augustine," replied his comrade, "if you mean to speak as is
fittest for the time."

"Nay, as for that," said Bertram, "if your ladyship can condescend to
lay aside your quality, my own good breeding is not so firmly sewed to
me but that I can doff it, and resume it again without its losing a
stitch; and since your ladyship, to whom I am sworn in obedience, is
pleased to command that I should treat you as my own son, shame it were
to me if I were not to show you the affection of a father, more
especially as I may well swear my great oath, that I owe you the duty
of such, though well I wot it has, in our case, been the lot of the
parent to be maintained by the kindness and liberality of the child;
for when was it that I hungered or thirsted, and the _black
stock_[Footnote: The table dormant, which stood in a baron's hall, was
often so designated.] of Berkley did not relieve my wants?"

"I would have it so," answered the young pilgrim; "I would have it so.
What use of the mountains of beef, and the oceans of beer, which they
say our domains produce, if there is a hungry heart among our
vassalage, or especially if thou, Bertram, who hast served as the
minstrel of our house for more than twenty years, shouldst experience
such a feeling?"

"Certes, lady," answered Bertram, "it would be like the catastrophe
which is told of the Baron of Fastenough, when his last mouse was
starved to death in the very pantry; and if I escape this journey
without such a calamity, I shall think myself out of reach of thirst or
famine for the whole of my life."

"Thou hast suffered already once or twice by these attacks, my poor
friend," said the lady.

"It is little," answered Bertram, "any thing that I have suffered; and
I were ungrateful to give the inconvenience of missing a breakfast, or
making an untimely dinner, so serious a name. But then I hardly see how
your ladyship can endure this gear much longer. You must yourself feel,
that the plodding along these high lands, of which the Scots give us
such good measure in their miles, is no jesting matter; and as for
Douglas Castle, why it is still three good miles off."

"The question then is," quoth the lady, heaving a sigh, "what we are to
do when we have so far to travel, and when the castle gates must be
locked long before we arrive there?"

"For that I will pledge my word," answered Bertram. "The gates of
Douglas, under the care of Sir John de Walton, do not open so easily as
those of the buttery hatch at our own castle, when it is well oiled;
and if your ladyship take my advice, you will turn southward ho! and in
two days at farthest, we shall be in a land where men's wants are
provided for, as the inns proclaim it, with the least possible delay,
and the secret of this little journey shall never be known to living
mortal but ourselves, as sure as I am sworn minstrel, and man of faith."

"I thank thee for thy advice, mine honest Bertram," said the lady, "but
I cannot profit by it. Should thy knowledge of these parts possess thee
with an acquaintance with any decent house, whether it belong to rich
or poor, I would willingly take quarters there, if I could obtain them
from this time until to-morrow morning. The gates of Douglas Castle
will then be open to guests of so peaceful an appearance as we carry
with us, and--and--it will out--we might have time to make such
applications to our toilet as might ensure us a good reception, by
drawing a comb through our locks, or such like foppery."

"Ah, madam!" said Bertram, "were not Sir John de Walton in question,
methinks I should venture to reply, that an unwashed brow, an unkempt
head of hair, and a look far more saucy than your ladyship ever wears,
or can wear, were the proper disguise to trick out that minstrel's boy,
whom, you wish to represent in the present pageant."

"Do you suffer your youthful pupils to be indeed so slovenly and so
saucy, Bertram?" answered the lady. "I for one will not imitate them in
that particular; and whether Sir John be now in the Castle of Douglas
or not, I will treat the soldiers who hold so honourable a charge with
a washed brow, and a head of hair somewhat ordered. As for going back
without seeing a castle which has mingled even with my very dreams--at
a word, Bertram, thou mayst go that way, but I will not."

"And if I part with your ladyship on such terms," responded the
minstrel, "now your frolic is so nearly accomplished, it shall be the
foul fiend himself, and nothing more comely or less dangerous, that
shall tear me from your side; and for lodging, there is not far from
hence the house of one Tom Dickson of Hazelside, one of the most honest
fellows of the Dale, and who, although a labouring man, ranked as high
as a warrior, when I was in this country, as any noble gentleman that
rode in the band of the Douglas."

"He is then a soldier?" said the lady.

"When his country or his lord need his sword," replied Bertram--"and,
to say the truth, they are seldom at peace; but otherwise, he is no
enemy, save to the wolf which plunders his herds."

"But forget not, my trusty guide," replied the lady, "that the blood in
our veins is English, and consequently, that we are in danger from all
who call themselves foes to the ruddy Cross."

"Do not fear this man's faith," answered Bertram. "You may trust to him
as to the best knight or gentleman of the land. We may make good our
lodging by a tune or a song; and it may remember you that I undertook
(provided it pleased your ladyship) to temporize a little with the
Scots, who, poor souls, love minstrelsy, and when they have but a
silver penny, will willingly bestow it to encourage the _gay
science_--I promised you, I say, that we should be as welcome to them
as if we had been born amidst their own wild hills; and for the best
that such a house as Dickson's affords, the glee-man's son, fair lady,
shall not breathe a wish in vain. And now, will you speak your mind to
your devoted friend and adopted father, or rather your sworn servant
and guide, Bertram the Minstrel, what it is your pleasure to do in this
matter?"

"O, we will certainly accept of the Scot's hospitality," said the lady,
"your minstrel word being plighted that he is a true man. Tom Dickson,
call you him?"

"Yes," replied Bertram, "such is his name; and by looking on these
sheep, I am assured that we are now upon his land."

"Indeed?" said the lady, with some surprise; "and how is your wisdom
aware of that?"

"I see the first letter of his name marked upon this flock," answered
the guide. "Ah, learning is what carries a man through the world, as
well as if he had the ring by virtue of which old minstrels tell that
Adam understood the language of the beasts in paradise. Ah, madam!
there is more wit taught in the shepherd's shieling than the lady
thinks of, who sews her painted seam in her summer bower."

"Be it so, good Bertram. And although not so deeply skilled in the
knowledge of written language as you are, it is impossible for me to
esteem its value more than I actually do; so hold we on the nearest
road to this Tom Dickson's, whose very sheep tell of his whereabout. I
trust we have not very far to go, although the knowledge that our
journey is shortened by a few miles has so much recovered my fatigue,
that methinks I could dance all the rest of the way."





     _Rosalind_. Well, this is the Forest of Arden.
     _Touchstone_. Ay, now am I in Arden; the more fool I. When I
was at
     home I was in a better place; but travellers must be content.
     _Rosalind_. Ay, be so, good Touchstone. Look you, who comes
here; a
     young man and an old, in solemn talk.
                    As You Like It. _Scene IV. Act 2_.


As the travellers spoke together, they reached a turn of the path which
presented a more extensive prospect than the broken face of the country
had yet shown them. A valley, through which flowed a small tributary
stream, exhibited the wild, but not unpleasant, features of "a lone
vale of green braken;" here and there besprinkled with groups of
alder-trees, of hazels, and of copse-oakwood, which had maintained
their stations in the recesses of the valley, although they had
vanished from the loftier and more exposed sides of the hills. The
farm-house or mansion-house, (for, from its size and appearance, it
might have been the one or the other,) was a large but low building,
and the walls of the out-houses were sufficiently strong to resist any
band of casual depredators. There was nothing, however, which could
withstand a more powerful force; for, in a country laid waste by war,
the farmer was then, as now, obliged to take his chance of the great
evils attendant upon that state of things; and his condition, never a
very eligible one, was rendered considerably worse by the insecurity
attending it. About half a mile farther was seen a Gothic building of
very small extent, having a half dismantled chapel, which the minstrel
pronounced to be the Abbey of Saint Bride. "The place," he said, "I
understand, is allowed to subsist, as two or three old monks and as
many nuns, whom it contains, are permitted by the English to serve God
there, and sometimes to give relief to Scottish travellers; and who
have accordingly taken assurance with Sir John de Walton, and accepted
as their superior a churchman on whom he thinks he can depend. But if
these guests happen to reveal any secrets, they are, by some means or
other, believed to fly towards the English governor; and therefore,
unless your ladyship's commands be positive, I think we had best not
trust ourselves to their hospitality."

"Of a surety, no," said the lady, "if thou canst provide me with
lodgings where we shall have more prudent hosts."

At this moment, two human forms were seen to approach the farm-house in
a different direction from the travellers, and speaking so high, in a
tone apparently of dispute, that the minstrel and his companion could
distinguish their voices though the distance was considerable. Having
screened his eyes with his hand for some minutes, Bertram at length
exclaimed, "By our Lady, it is my old friend, Tom Dickson, sure
enough!--What can make him in such bad humour with the lad, who, I
think, may be the little wild boy, his son Charles, who used to run
about and plait rushes some twenty years ago? It is lucky, however, we
have found our friends astir; for I warrant, Tom hath a hearty piece of
beef in the pot ere he goes to bed, and he must have changed his wont
if an old friend hath not his share; and who knows, had we come later,
at what hour they may now find it convenient to drop latch and draw
bolt so near a hostile garrison; for if we call things by their right
names, such is the proper term for an English garrison in the castle of
a Scottish nobleman."

"Foolish man," answered the lady, "thou judgest of Sir John de Walton
as thou wouldst of some rude boor, to whom the opportunity of doing
what he wills is a temptation and license to exercise cruelty and
oppression. Now, I could plight you my word, that, setting apart the
quarrel of the kingdoms, which, of course, will be fought out in fair
battles on both sides, you will find that English and Scottish, within
this domain, and within the reach of Sir John de Walton's influence,
live together as that same flock of sheep and goats do with the
shepherd's dog; a foe from whom they fly upon certain occasions, but
around whom they nevertheless eagerly gather for protection should a
wolf happen to show himself."

"It is not to your ladyship," answered Bertram, "that I should venture
to state my opinion of such matters; but the young knight, when he is
sheathed in armour, is a different being from him who feasts in halls
among press of ladies; and he that feeds by another man's fireside, and
when his landlord, of all men in the world, chances to be the Black
Douglas, has reason to keep his eyes about him as he makes his
meal:--but it were better I looked after our own evening refreshment,
than that I stood here gaping and talking about other folk's matters."
So saying, he called out in a thundering tone of voice, "Dickson!--what
ho, Thomas Dickson!--will you not acknowledge an old friend who is much
disposed to trust his supper and night's lodging to your hospitality?"

The Scotchman, attracted by the call, looked first along the banks of
the river, then upward to the bare side of the hill, and at length cast
his eyes upon the two figures who were descending from it.

As if he felt the night colder while he advanced from the more
sheltered part of the valley to meet them, the Douglas Dale farmer
wrapped closer around him the grey plaid, which, from an early period,
has been used by the shepherds of the south of Scotland, and the
appearance of which gives a romantic air to the peasantry and middle
classes; and which, although less brilliant and gaudy in its colours,
is as picturesque in its arrangement as the more military tartan mantle
of the Highlands. When they approached near to each other, the lady
might observe that this friend of her guide was a stout athletic man,
somewhat past the middle of life, and already showing marks of the
approach, but none of the infirmities, of age, upon a countenance which
had been exposed to many a storm. Sharp eyes, too, and a quick
observation, exhibited signs of vigilance, acquired by one who had
lived long in a country where he had constant occasion for looking
around him with caution. His features were still swollen with
displeasure; and the handsome young man who attended him seemed to be
discontented, like one who had undergone no gentle marks of his
father's indignation, and who, from the sullen expression which mingled
with an appearance of shame on his countenance, seemed at once affected
by anger and remorse.

"Do you not remember me, old friend?" said Bertram, as they approached
within a distance for communing; "or have the twenty years which have
marched over us since we met, carried along with them all remembrance
of Bertram, the English minstrel?"

"In troth," answered the Scot, "it is not for want of plenty of your
countrymen to keep you in my remembrance, and I have hardly heard one
of them so much as whistle

    'Hey, now the day dawns,'

but it has recalled some note of your blythe rebeck; and yet, such
animals are we, that I had forgot the mien of my old friend, and
scarcely knew him at a distance. But we have had trouble lately; there
are a thousand of your countrymen that keep garrison in the Perilous
Castle of Douglas yonder, as well as in other places through the vale,
and that is but a woful sight for a true Scotchman--even my own poor
house has not escaped the dignity of a garrison of a man-at-arms,
besides two or three archer knaves, and one or two slips of mischievous
boys called pages, and so forth, who will not let a man say, 'this is
my own,' by his own fireside. Do not, therefore, think hardly of me,
old comrade, if I show you a welcome something colder than you might
expect from a friend of other days; for, by Saint Bride of Douglas, I
have scarcely anything left to which I can say welcome."

"Small welcome will serve," said Bertram. "My son, make thy reverence
to thy father's old friend. Augustine is learning my joyous trade, but
he will need some practice ere he can endure its fatigues. If you could
give him some little matter of food, and a quiet bed for the night,
there's no fear but that we shall both do well enough; for I dare say,
when you travel with my friend Charles there,--if that tall youth
chance to be my old acquaintance Charles,--you will find yourself
accommodated when his wants are once well provided for."

"Nay, the foul fiend take me if I do," answered the Scottish
husbandman. "I know not what the lads of this day are made of--not of
the same clay as their fathers, to be sure--not sprung from their
heather, which fears neither wind nor rain, but from some delicate
plant of a foreign country, which will not thrive unless it be
nourished under glass, with a murrain to it. The good Lord of
Douglas--I have been his henchman, and can vouch for it--did not in his
pagehood desire such food and lodging as, in the present day, will
hardly satisfy such a lad as your friend Charles."

"Nay," said Bertram, "it is not that my Augustine is over nice; but,
for other reasons, I must request of you a bed to himself; he hath of
late been unwell."

"Ay, I understand," said Dickson, "your son hath had a touch of that
illness which terminates so frequently in the black death you English
folk die of? We hear much of the havoc it has made to the southward.
Comes it hitherward?"

Bertram nodded.

"Well, my father's house," continued the farmer, "hath more rooms than
one, and your son shall have one well-aired and comfortable; and for
supper, ye shall have a part of what is prepared for your countrymen,
though I would rather have their room than their company. Since I am
bound to feed a score of them, they will not dispute the claim of such
a skilful minstrel as thou art to a night's hospitality. I am ashamed
to say that I must do their bidding even in my own house, Well-a-day,
if my good lord were in possession of his own, I have heart and hand
enough to turn the whole of them out of my house, like--like"----

"To speak plainly," said Bertram, "like a southern strolling gang from
Redesdale, whom I have seen you fling out of your house like a litter
of blind puppies, when not one of them looked behind to see who had
done him the courtesy until he was half-way to Cairntable."

"Ay," answered the Scotchman, drawing himself up at least six inches
taller than before; "then I had a house of my own, and a cause and an
arm to keep it. Now I am--what signifies it what I am?--the noblest
lord in Scotland is little better."

"Truly, friend," said Bertram, "now you view this matter in a rational
light. I do not say that the wisest, the richest, or the strongest man
in this world has any right to tyrannize over his neighbour, because he
is the more weak, ignorant, and the poorer; but yet if he does enter
into such a controversy, he must submit to the course of nature, and
that will always give the advantage in the tide of battle to wealth,
strength, and health."

"With permission, however," answered Dickson, "the weaker party, if he
use his facilities to the utmost, may, in the long run, obtain revenge
upon the author of his sufferings, which would be at least compensation
for his temporary submission; and he acts simply as a man, and most
foolishly as a Scotchman, whether he sustain these wrongs with the
insensibility of an idiot, or whether he endeavour to revenge them
before Heaven's appointed time has arrived.--But if I talk thus I shall
scare you, as I have scared some of your countrymen, from accepting a
meal of meat and a night's lodging, in a house where you might be
called with the morning to a bloody settlement of a national quarrel."

"Never mind," said Bertram, "we have been known to each other of old;
and I am no more afraid of meeting unkindness in your house, than you
expect me to come here for the purpose of adding to the injuries of
which you complain."

"So be it," said Dickson; "and you, my old friend, are as welcome to my
abode as when it never held any guest, save of my own inviting.--And
you, my young friend, Master Augustine, shall be looked after as well
as if you came with a gay brow and a light cheek, such as best becomes
the _gay science_."

"But wherefore, may I ask," said Bertram, "so much displeased but now
at my young friend Charles?"

The youth answered before his father had time to speak. "My father,
good sir, may put what show upon it he will, but shrewd and wise men
wax weak in the brain these troublous times. He saw two or three wolves
seize upon three of our choicest wethers; and because I shouted to give
the alarm to the English garrison, he was angry as if he could have
murdered me---just for saving the sheep from the jaws that would have
devoured them."

"This is a strange account of thee, old friend," said Bertram. "Dost
thou connive with the wolves in robbing thine own fold?"

"Why, let it pass, if thou lovest me," answered the countryman;
"Charles could tell thee something nearer the truth if he had a mind;
but for the present let it pass."

The minstrel, perceiving that the Scotchman was fretted and embarrassed
with the subject, pressed it no farther.

At this moment, in crossing the threshold of Thomas Dickson's house,
they were greeted with sounds from two English soldiers within. "Quiet,
Anthony," said one voice,--"quiet, man!--for the sake of common sense,
if not common manners;--Robin Hood himself never sat down to his board
ere the roast was ready."

"Ready!" quoth another rough voice; "It is roasting to rags, and small
had been the knave Dickson's share, even of these rags, had it not been
the express orders of the worshipful Sir John de Walton, that the
soldiers who lie at outposts should afford to the inmates such
provisions as are not necessary for their own subsistence."

"Hush, Anthony,--hush, for shame!" replied his fellow-soldier, "if ever
I heard our host's step, I heard it this instant; so give over thy
grumbling, since our captain, as we all know, hath prohibited, under
strict penalties, all quarrels between his followers and the people of
the country."

"I am sure," replied Anthony, "that I have ministered occasion to none;
but I would I were equally certain of the good meaning of this
sullen-browed Thomas Dickson towards the English soldiers, for I seldom
go to bed in this dungeon of a house, but I expect my throat will gape
as wide as a thirsty oyster before I awaken. Here he comes, however,"
added Anthony, sinking his sharp tones as he spoke; "and I hope to be
excommunicated if he has not brought with him that mad animal, his son
Charles, and two other strangers, hungry enough, I'll be sworn, to eat
up the whole supper, if they do us no other injury."

"Shame of thyself, Anthony," repeated his comrade; "a good archer thou
as ever wore Kendal green, and yet affect to be frightened for two
tired travellers, and alarmed for the inroad their hunger may make on
the night's meal. There are four or five of us here--we have our bows
and our bills within reach, and scorn to be chased from our supper, or
cheated out of our share of it by a dozen Scotchmen, whether stationary
or strollers. How say'st thou?" he added, turning to Dickson--"How say
ye, quartermaster? it is no secret, that by the directions given to our
post, we must enquire into the occupations of such guests as you may
receive besides ourselves, your unwilling inmates; you are as ready for
supper, I warrant, as supper is for you, and I will only delay you and
my friend Anthony,--who becomes dreadfully impatient, until you answer
two or three questions which you wot of."

"Bend-the-Bow," answered Dickson, "thou art a civil fellow; and
although it is something hard to be constrained to give an account of
one's friends, because they chance to quarter in one's own house for a
night or two, yet I must submit to the times, and make no vain
opposition. You may mark down in your breviary there, that upon the
fourteenth day before Palm Sunday, Thomas Dickson brought to his house
of Hazelside, in which you hold garrison, by orders from the English
governor, Sir John de Walton, two strangers, to whom the said Thomas
Dickson had promised refreshment, and a bed for the evening, if it be
lawful at this time and place."

"But what are they, these strangers?" said Anthony, somewhat sharply.

"A fine world the while," murmured Thomas Dickson, "that an honest man
should be forced to answer the questions of every paltry
companion!"--But he mitigated his voice and proceeded. "The eldest of
my guests is Bertram, an ancient English minstrel, who is bound on his
own errand to the Castle of Douglas, and will communicate what he has
to say of news to Sir John de Walton himself. I have known him for
twenty years, and never heard any thing of him save that he was good
man and true. The younger stranger is his son, a lad recovering from
the English disorder, which has been raging far and wide in
Westmoreland and Cumberland."

"Tell me," said Bend-the-Bow, "this same Bertram,--was he not about a
year since in the service of some noble lady in our own country?"

"I have heard so," answered Dickson.

"We shall, in that case, I think, incur little danger," replied
Bend-the-Bow, "by allowing this old man and his son to proceed on their
journey to the castle."

"You are my elder and my better," answered Anthony; "but I may remind
you that it is not so clearly our duty to give free passage, into a
garrison of a thousand men of all ranks, to a youth who has been so
lately attacked by a contagious disorder; and I question if our
commander would not rather hear that the Black Douglas, with a hundred
devils as black as himself, since such is his colour, had taken
possession of the outposts of Hazelside with sword and battle-axe, than
that one person suffering under this fell sickness had entered
peaceably, and by the open wicket of the castle."

"There is something in what thou sayest, Anthony," replied his comrade;
"and considering that our governor, since he has undertaken the
troublesome job of keeping a castle which is esteemed so much more
dangerous than any other within Scotland, has become one of the most
cautious and jealous men in the world, we had better, I think, inform
him of the circumstance, and take his commands how the stripling is to
be dealt with."

"Content am I," said the archer; "and first, methinks, I would just, in
order to show that we know what belongs to such a case, ask the
stripling a few questions, as how long he has been ill, by what
physicians he has been attended, when he was cured, and how his cure is
certified, &e."

"True, brother," said Bend-the-Bow. "Thou hearest, minstrel, we would
ask thy son some questions--What has become of him?--he was in this
apartment but now."

"So please you," answered Bertram, "he did but pass through the
apartment. Mr. Thomas Dickson, at my entreaty, as well as in respectful
reverence to your honour's health, carried him through the room without
tarriance, judging his own bed-chamber the fittest place for a young
man recovering from a severe illness, and after a day of no small
fatigue."

"Well," answered the elder archer, "though it is uncommon for men who,
like us, live by bow-string and quiver, to meddle with interrogations
and examinations; yet, as the case stands, we must make some enquiries
of your son, ere we permit him to set forth to the Castle of Douglas,
where you say his errand leads him."

"Rather my errand, noble sir," said the minstrel, "than that of the
young man himself."

"If such be the case," answered Bend-the-Bow, "we may sufficiently do
our duty by sending yourself, with the first grey light of dawn, to the
castle, and letting your son remain in bed, which I warrant is the
fittest place for him, until we shall receive Sir John de Walton's
commands whether he is to be brought onward or not."

"And we may as well," said Anthony, "since we are to have this man's
company at supper, make him acquainted with the rules of the
out-garrison stationed here for the time." So saying, he pulled a
scroll from his leathern pouch, and said, "Minstrel, canst thou read?"

"It becomes my calling," said the minstrel.

"It has nothing to do with mine, though," answered the archer, "and
therefore do thou read these regulations aloud; for since I do not
comprehend these characters by sight, I lose no chance of having them
read over to me as often as I can, that I may fix their sense in my
memory. So beware that thou readest the words letter for letter as they
are set down; for thou dost so at thy peril, Sir Minstrel, if thou
readest not like a true man."

"On my minstrel word," said Bertram, and began to read excessively
slow; for he wished to gain a little time for consideration, which he
foresaw would be necessary to prevent his being separated from his
mistress, which was likely to occasion her much anxiety and distress.
He therefore began thus:--"'Outpost at Hazelside, the steading of
Goodman Thomas Dickson'--Ay, Thomas, and is thy house so called?"

"It is the ancient name of the steading," said the Scot, "being
surrounded by a hazel-shaw, or thicket."

"Hold your chattering tongue, minstrel," said Anthony, "and proceed, as
you value your ears, which you seem disposed to make less use of."

"'His garrison'" proceeded the minstrel, reading, "'consists of a lance
with its furniture.' What, then, a lance, in other words, a belted
knight, commands this party?"

"'Tis no concern of thine," said the archer.

"But it is," answered the minstrel; "we have a right to be examined by
the highest person in presence."

"I will show thee, thou rascal," said the archer, starting up, "that I
am lance enough for thee to reply to, and I will break thy head if thou
say'st a word more."

"Take care, brother Anthony," said his comrade, "we are to use
travellers courteously--and, with your leave, those travellers best who
come from our native land."

"It is even so stated here," said the minstrel, and he proceeded to
read:--"'The watch at this outpost of Hazelside [Footnote: Hazelside
Place, the fief granted to Thomas Dickson by William the Hardy, seventh
Lord Douglas, is still pointed out about two miles to the southwest of
the Castle Dangerous. Dickson was sixty years of age at the time when
Lord James first appeared in Douglasdale. His heirs kept possession of
the fief for centuries; and some respectable gentlemen's families in
Lanarkshire still trace themselves to this ancestor.--_From Notes by
Mr. Haddow_.] shall stop and examine all travellers passing by the said
station, suffering such to pass onward to the town of Douglas or to
Douglas Castle, always interrogating them with civility, and detaining
and turning them back if there arise matter of suspicion; but
conducting themselves in all matters civilly and courteously to the
people of the country, and to those who travel in it.' You see, most
excellent and valiant archer," added the commentator Bertram, "that
courtesy and civility are, above all, recommended to your worship in
your conduct towards the inhabitants, and those passengers who, like
us, may chance to fall under your rules in such matters."

"I am not to be told at this time of day," said the archer, "how to
conduct myself in the discharge of my duties. Let me advise you, Sir
Minstrel, to be frank and open in your answers to our enquiries, and
you shall have no reason to complain."

"I hope at all events," said the minstrel, "to have your favour for my
son, who is a delicate stripling, and not accustomed to play his part
among the crew which inhabit this wild world."

"Well," continued the elder and more civil of the two archers, "if thy
son be a novice in this terrestrial navigation, I warrant that thou, my
friend, from thy look and manner of speech, hast enough of skill to use
thy compass. To comfort thee, although thou must thyself answer the
questions of our governor or deputy-governor, in order that he may see
there is no offence in thee, I think there may be permission granted
for thy son's residing here in the convent hard by, (where the nuns, by
the way, are as old as the monks, and have nearly as long beards, so
thou mayst be easy about thy son's morals,) until thou hast done thy
business at Douglas Castle, and art ready to resume thy journey."

"If such permission," said the minstrel, "can be obtained, I should be
better pleased to leave him at the abbey, and go myself, in the first
place, to take the directions of your commanding officer."

"Certainly," answered the archer, "that will be the safest and best
way; and with a piece or two of money, thou mayst secure the protection
of the abbot."

"Thou say'st well," answered the minstrel; "I have known life, I have
known every stile, gap, pathway, and pass of this wilderness of ours
for some thirty years; and he that cannot steer his course fairly
through it like an able seaman, after having served such an
apprenticeship, can hardly ever be taught, were a century to be given
him to learn it in."

"Since thou art so expert a mariner," answered the archer Anthony,
"thou hast, I warrant me, met in thy wanderings a potation called a
morning's draught, which they who are conducted by others, where they
themselves lack experience, are used to bestow upon those who undertake
the task of guide upon such an occasion?"

"I understand you, sir," quoth the minstrel; "and although money, or
_drink-geld_, as the Fleming calls it, is rather a scarce commodity in
the purse of one of my calling, yet according to my feeble ability,
thou shalt have no cause to complain that thine eyes or those of thy
comrades have been damaged by a Scottish mist, while we can find an
English coin to pay for the good liquor which would wash them clear."

"Content," said the archer; "we now understand each other; and if
difficulties arise on the road, thou shalt not want the countenance of
Anthony to sail triumphantly through them. But thou hadst better let
thy son know soon of the early visit to the abbot to-morrow, for thou
mayst guess that we cannot and dare not delay our departure for the
convent a minute after the eastern sky is ruddy; and, with other
infirmities, young men often are prone to laziness and a love of ease."

"Thou shalt have no reason to think so," answered the minstrel; "not
the lark himself, when waked by the first ray peeping over the black
cloud, springs more lightly to the sky, than will my Augustine answer
the same brilliant summons. And now we understand each other, I would
only further pray you to forbear light talk while my son is in your
company,--a boy of innocent life, and timid in conversation."

"Nay, jolly minstrel," said the elder archer, "thou givest us here too
gross an example of Satan reproving sin. If thou hast followed thy
craft for twenty years, as thou pretendest, thy son, having kept thee
company since childhood, must by this time be fit to open a school to
teach even devils the practice of the seven deadly sins, of which none
know the theory if those of the _gay science_ are lacking."

"Truly, comrade, thou speakest well," answered Bertram, "and I
acknowledge that we minstrels are too much to blame in this matter.
Nevertheless, in good sooth, the fault is not one of which I myself am
particularly guilty; on the contrary, I think that he who would wish to
have his own hair honoured when time has strewed it with silver, should
so rein his mirth when in the presence of the young, as may show in
what respect he holds innocence. I will, therefore, with your
permission, speak a word to Augustine, that to-morrow we must be on
foot early."

"Do so, my friend," said the English soldier; "and do the same the more
speedily that our poor supper is still awaiting until thou art ready to
partake of it."

"To which, I promise thee," said Bertram, "I am disposed to entertain,
no delay."

"Follow me, then," said Dickson, "and I will show thee where this young
bird of thine has his nest."

Their host accordingly tripped up the wooden stair, and tapped at a
door, which he thus indicated was that of his younger guest.

"Your father," continued he, as the door opened, "would speak with you,
Master Augustine."

"Excuse me, my host," answered Augustine, "the truth is, that this room
being directly above your eating-chamber, and the flooring not in the
best possible repair, I have been compelled to the unhandsome practice
of eavesdropping, and not a word has escaped me that passed concerning
my proposed residence at the abbey, our journey to-morrow, and the
somewhat early hour at which I must shake off sloth, and, according to
thy expression, fly down from the roost."

"And how dost thou relish," said Dickson, "being left with the Abbot of
Saint Bride's little flock here."

"Why, well," said the youth, "if the abbot is a man of respectability
becoming his vocation, and not one of those swaggering churchmen, who
stretch out the sword, and bear themselves like rank soldiers in these
troublous times."

"For that, young master," said Dickson, "if you let him put his hand
deep enough into your purse, he will hardly quarrel with any thing."
"Then I will leave him to my father," replied Augustine, "who will not
grudge him any thing he asks in reason."

"In that case," replied the Scotchman, "you may trust to our abbot for
good accommodation--and so both sides are pleased."

"It is well, my son," said Bertram, who now joined in the conversation;
"and that thou mayst be ready for early travelling, I shall presently
get our host to send thee some food, after partaking of which thou
shouldst go to bed and sleep off the fatigue of to-day, since to-morrow
will bring work for itself."

"And as for thy engagement to these honest archers," answered
Augustine, "I hope you will be able to do what will give pleasure to
our guides, if they are disposed to be civil and true men."

"God bless thee, my child!" answered Bertram; "thou knowest already
what would drag after thy beck all the English archers that were ever
on this side of the Solway. There is no fear of a grey goose shaft, if
you sing a _reveillez_ like to that which chimed even now from that
silken nest of dainty young goldfinches."

"Hold me as in readiness, then," said the seeming youth, "when you
depart to-morrow morning. I am within hearing, I suppose, of the bells
of Saint Bride's chapel, and have no fear, through my sloth, of keeping
you or your company waiting."

"Good night, and God bless thee, my child!" again said the minstrel;
"remember that your father sleeps not far distant, and on the slightest
alarm will not fail to be with you. I need scarce bid thee recommend
thyself, meantime, to the great Being, who is the friend and father of
us all."

The pilgrim thanked his supposed father for his evening blessing, and
the visitors withdrew without farther speech at the time, leaving the
young lady to those engrossing fears, which, the novelty of her
situation, and the native delicacy of her sex being considered,
naturally thronged upon her.

The tramp of a horse's foot was not long after heard at the house of
Hazelside, and the rider was welcomed by its garrison with marks of
respect. Bertram understood so much as to discover from the
conversation of the warders that this late arrival was Aymer de
Valence, the knight who commanded the little party, and to the
furniture of whose lance, as it was technically called, belonged the
archers with whom we have already been acquainted, a man-at-arms or
two, a certain proportion of pages or grooms, and, in short, the
command and guidance of the garrison at Thomas Dickson's, while in rank
he was Deputy-governor of Douglas Castle.

To prevent all suspicion respecting himself and his companion, as well
as the risk of the latter being disturbed, the minstrel thought it
proper to present himself to the inspection of this knight, the great
authority of the little place. He found him with as little scruple as
the archers heretofore, making a supper of the relics of the roast beef.

Before this young knight Bertram underwent an examination, while an old
soldier took down in writing such items of information as the examinate
thought proper to express in his replies, both with regard to the
minutiae of his present journey, his business at Castle Douglas, and
his route when that business should be accomplished; a much more minute
examination, in a word, than he had hitherto undergone by the archers,
or perhaps than was quite agreeable to him, being encumbered with at
least the knowledge of one secret, whatever more. Not that this new
examinator had any thing stern or severe in his looks or his questions.
As to the first, he was mild, gentle, and "meek as a maid," and
possessed exactly of the courteous manners ascribed by our father
Chaucer to the pattern of chivalry whom he describes upon his
pilgrimage to Canterbury. But with all his gentleness, De Valence
showed a great degree of acuteness and accuracy in his queries; and
well pleased was Bertram that the young knight did not insist upon
seeing his supposed son, although even in that case his ready wit had
resolved, like a seaman in a tempest, to sacrifice one part to preserve
the rest. He was not, however, driven to this extremity, being treated
by Sir Aymer with that degree of courtesy which in that age men of song
were in general thought entitled to. The knight kindly and liberally
consented to the lad's remaining in the convent, as a fit and quiet
residence for a stripling and an invalid, until Sir John de Walton
should express his pleasure on the subject; and Sir Aymer consented to
this arrangement the more willingly, as it averted all possible danger
of bringing disease into the English garrison.

By the young knight's order, all in Dickson's house were despatched
earlier to rest than usual; the matin bell of the neighbouring chapel
being the signal for their assembly by daybreak. They rendezvoused
accordingly, and proceeded to Saint Bride's, where they heard mass,
after which an interview took place between the abbot Jerome and the
minstrel, in which the former undertook, with the permission of De
Valence, to receive Augustine into his abbey as a guest for a few days,
less or more, and for which Bertram promised an acknowledgment in name
of alms, which was amply satisfactory.

"So be it," said Bertram, taking leave of his supposed son; "rely on it
I will not tarry a day longer at Douglas Castle than shall suffice for
transacting my business there, which is to look after the old books you
wot of, and I will speedily return for thee to the Abbey of Saint
Bride, to resume in company our journey homeward."

"O father," replied the youth, with a smile, "I fear if you get among
romances and chronicles, you will be so earnest in your researches,
that you will forget poor Augustine and his concerns."

"Never fear me, Augustine," said the old man, making the motion of
throwing a kiss towards the boy; "thou art good and virtuous, and
Heaven will not neglect thee, were thy father unnatural enough to do
so. Believe me, all the old songs since Merlin's day shall not make me
forget thee."

Thus they separated, the minstrel, with the English knight and his
retinue, to move towards the castle, and the youth in dutiful
attendance on the venerable abbot, who was delighted to find that his
guest's thoughts turned rather upon spiritual things than on the
morning repast, of the approach of which he could not help being
himself sensible.





     This night, methinks, is but the daylight sick.
     It looks a little paler; 'tis a day
     Such as the day is when the sun is hid.
                          MERCHANT OF VENICE.


To facilitate the progress of the party on its way to Douglas Castle,
the Knight of Valence offered the minstrel the convenience of a horse,
which the fatigues of yesterday made him gladly accept. Any one
acquainted with equestrian exercise, is aware that no means of
refreshment carries away the sense of fatigue from over walking so
easily, as the exchange to riding, which calls into play another set of
muscles, and leaves those which have been over exerted an opportunity
of resting through change of motion, more completely than they could in
absolute repose. Sir Aymer de Valence was sheathed in armour, and
mounted on his charger, two of the archers, a groom of mean rank, and a
squire, who looked in his day for the honour of knighthood, completed
the detachment, which seemed so disposed as to secure the minstrel from
escape, and to protect him against violence. "Not," said the young
knight, addressing himself to Bertram, "that there is usually danger in
travelling in this country any more than in the most quiet districts of
England; but some disturbances, as you may have learnt, have broken out
here within this last year, and have caused the garrison of Castle
Douglas to maintain a stricter watch. But let us move on, for the
complexion of the day is congenial with the original derivation of the
name of the country, and the description of the chiefs to whom it
belonged--_Sholto Dhu Glass_--(see yon dark grey man,) and dark grey
will our route prove this morning, though by good luck it is not long."

The morning was indeed what the original Gaelic words implied, a
drizzly, dark, moist day; the mist had settled upon the hills, and
unrolled itself upon brook, glade, and tarn, and the spring breeze was
not powerful enough to raise the veil, though from the wild sounds
which were heard occasionally on the ridges, and through the glens, it
might be supposed to wail at a sense of its own inability. The route of
the travellers was directed by the course which the river had ploughed
for itself down the valley, the banks of which bore in general that
dark grey livery which Sir Aymer de Valence had intimated to be the
prevalent tint of the country. Some ineffectual struggles of the sun
shot a ray here and there to salute the peaks of the hills; yet these
were unable to surmount the dulness of a March morning, and, at so
early an hour, produced a variety of shades, rather than a gleam of
brightness upon the eastern horizon. The view was monotonous and
depressing, and apparently the good knight Aymer sought some amusement
in occasional talk with Bertram, who, as was usual with his craft,
possessed a fund of knowledge, and a power of conversation, well suited
to pass away a dull morning. The minstrel, well pleased to pick up such
information as he might be able concerning the present state of the
country, embraced every opportunity of sustaining the dialogue.

"I would speak with you, Sir Minstrel," said the young knight. "If thou
dost not find the air of this morning too harsh for thine organs,
heartily do I wish thou wouldst fairly tell me what can have induced
thee, being, as thou seemst, a man of sense, to thrust thyself into a
wild country like this, at such a time.--And you, my masters,"
addressing the archers and the rest of the party, "methinks it would be
as fitting and seeming if you reined back your steeds for a horse's
length or so, since I apprehend you can travel on your way without the
pastime of minstrelsy." The bowmen took the hint, and fell back, but,
as was expressed by their grumbling observations, by no means pleased
that there seemed little chance of their overhearing what conversation
should pass between the young knight and the minstrel, which proceeded
as follows--

"I am, then, to understand, good minstrel," said the knight, "that you,
who have in your time borne arms, and even followed Saint George's
red-cross banner to the Holy Sepulchre, are so little tired of the
danger attending our profession, that you feel yourself attracted
unnecessarily to regions where the sword, for ever loose in its
scabbard, is ready to start on the slightest provocation?"

"It would be hard," replied the minstrel bluntly, "to answer such a
question in the affirmative; and yet, when you consider how nearly
allied is his profession who celebrates deeds of arms with that of the
knight who performs them, your honour, I think, will hold it advisable
that a minstrel desirous of doing his devoir, should, like a young
knight, seek the truth of adventures where it is to be found, and
rather visit countries where the knowledge is preserved of high and
noble deeds, than those lazy and quiet realms, in which men live
indolently, and die ignobly in peace, or by sentence of law. You
yourself, sir, and those like you, who hold life cheap in respect of
glory, guide your course through this world on the very same principle
which brings your poor rhyming servant Bertram from a far province of
merry England, to this dark country of rugged Scotland called Douglas
Dale. You long to see adventures worthy of notice, and I (under favour
for naming us two in the same breath) seek a scanty and precarious, but
not a dishonourable living, by preparing for immortality, as well as I
can, the particulars of such exploits, especially the names of those
who were the heroes of these actions. Each, therefore, labours in his
vocation; nor can the one be justly wondered at more than the other,
seeing that if there be any difference in the degrees of danger to
which both the hero and the poet are exposed, the courage, strength,
arms, and address of the valiant knight, render it safer for him to
venture into scenes of peril, than for the poor man of rhyme."

"You say well," answered the warrior; "and although it is something of
novelty to me to hear your craft represented as upon a level with my
own mode of life, yet shame were it to say that the minstrel who toils
so much to keep in memory the feats of gallant knights should not
himself prefer fame to existence, and a single achievement of valour to
a whole age without a name, or to affirm that he follows a mean and
unworthy profession."

"Your worship will then acknowledge," said the minstrel, "that it is a
legitimate object in such as myself, who, simple as I am, have taken my
regular degrees among the professors of the _gay science_ at the
capital town of Aigues-Mortos, to struggle forward into this northern
district, where I am well assured many things have happened which have
been adapted to the harp by minstrels of great fame in ancient days,
and have become the subject of lays which lie deposited in the library
of Castle Douglas, where, unless copied over by some one who
understands the old British characters and language, they must, with
whatever they may contain, whether of entertainment or edification, be
speedily lost to posterity. If these hidden treasures were preserved
and recorded by the minstrel art of my poor self and others, it might
be held well to compensate for the risk of a chance blow of a
broadsword, or the sweep of a brown bill, while I am engaged in
collecting them; and I were unworthy of the name of a man, much more of
an inventor or finder, [Footnote: The name of Maker stands for _Poet_
(with the original sense of which word it exactly corresponds) in the
old Scottish language. That of _Trouveur_ or Troubadour--Finder, in
short--has a similar meaning, and almost in every country the poetical
tribes have been graced with the same epithets, inferring the property
of those who employ invention or creation.] should I weigh the loss of
life, a commodity always so uncertain, against the chance of that
immortality which will survive in my lay after my broken voice and
shivered harp shall no longer be able either to express tune or
accompany tale."

"Certainly," said Sir Aymer, "having a heart to feel such a motive, you
have an undoubted right to express it; nor should I have been in any
degree disposed to question it had I found many minstrels prepared,
like yourself, to prefer renown even to life itself, which most men
think of greatly more consequence."

"There are, indeed, noble sir," replied Bertram, "minstrels, and, with
your reverence, even belted knights themselves, who do not sufficiently
value that renown which is acquired at the risk of life. To such
ignoble men we must leave their own reward--let us abandon to them
earth, and the things of earth, since they cannot aspire to that glory
which is the _best_ reward of others."

The minstrel uttered these last words with such enthusiasm, that the
knight drew his bridle, and stood fronting Bertram, with his
countenance kindling at the same theme, on which, after a short
silence, he expressed himself with a like vivacity.

"Well fare thy heart, gay companion! I am happy to see there is still
so much enthusiasm surviving in the world. Thou hast fairly won the
minstrel groat; and if I do not pay it in conformity to my sense of thy
merit, it shall be the fault of dame Fortune, who has graced my labours
in these Scottish wars with the niggard pay of Scottish money. A gold
piece or two there must be remaining of the ransom of one French
knight, whom chance threw into my hands, and that, my friend, shall
surely be thine own; and hark thee, I, Aymer de Valence, who now speak
to thee, am born of the noble House of Pembroke; and though now
landless, shall, by the grace of Our Lady, have in time a fitting
establishment, wherein I will find room for a minstrel like thee, if
thy talents have not by that time found thee a better patron."

"Thank thee, noble knight," said the minstrel, "as well for thy present
intentions, as I hope I shall for thy future performance; but I may
say, with truth, that I have not the sordid inclination of many of my
brethren."

"He who partakes the true thirst of noble fame," said the young knight,
"can have little room in his heart for the love of gold. But thou hast
not yet told me, friend minstrel, what are the motives, in particular
which have attracted thy wandering steps to this wild country?"

"Were I to do so," replied Bertram, rather desirous to avoid the
question, as in some respects too nearly bordering on the secret
purpose of his journey, "it might sound like a studied panegyric on
thine own bold deeds, Sir Knight, and those of your companions in arms;
and such adulation, minstrel as I am, I hate like an empty cup at a
companion's lips. But let me say in few words, that Douglas Castle, and
the deeds of valour which it has witnessed, have sounded wide through
England; nor is there a gallant knight or trusty minstrel, whose heart
does not throb at the name of the stronghold, which, in former days,
the foot of an Englishman never entered, except in hospitality. There
is a magic in the very names of Sir John de Walton and Sir Aymer de
Valence, the gallant defenders of a place so often won back by its
ancient lords, and with such circumstances of valour and cruelty, that
it bears, in England, the name of the Dangerous Castle."

"Yet I would fain hear," answered the knight, "your own minstrel
account of those legends which have induced you, for the amusement of
future times, to visit a country which, at this period, is so
distracted and perilous."

"If you can endure the length of a minstrel tale," said Bertram--"I for
one am always amused by the exercise of my vocation, and have no
objection to tell my story, provided you do not prove an impatient
listener."

"Nay, for that matter," said the young knight, "a fair listener thou
shalt have of me; and if my reward be not great, my attention at least
shall be remarkable."

"And he," said the minstrel, "must be a poor gleeman who does not hold
himself better paid with that, than with gold or silver, were the
pieces English rose-nobles. On this condition, then, I begin a long
story, which may, in one or other of its details, find subject for
better minstrels than myself, and be listened to by such warriors as
you hundreds of years hence."





     While many a merry lay and many a song
     Cheer'd the rough road, we wish'd the rough road long;
     The rough road then returning in a round,
     Mark'd their impatient steps, for all was fairy ground.
        DR. JOHNSON.


"It was about the year of redemption one thousand two hundred and
eighty-five years," began, the minstrel, "when King Alexander the Third
of Scotland lost his daughter Margaret, whose only child of the same
name, called the Maiden of Norway, (as her father was king of that
country,) became the heiress of this kingdom of Scotland, as well as of
her father's crown. An unhappy death was this for Alexander, who had no
nearer heirs left of his own body than this grandchild. She indeed
might claim his kingdom by birthright; but the difficulty of
establishing such a claim of inheritance must have been anticipated by
all who bestowed a thought upon the subject. The Scottish king,
therefore, endeavoured to make up for his loss by replacing his late
Queen, who was an English princess, sister of our Edward the First,
with Juletta, daughter of the Count de Dreux. The solemnities at the
nuptial ceremony, which took place in the town of Jedburgh, were very
great and remarkable, and particularly when, amidst the display of a
pageant which was exhibited on the occasion, a ghastly spectre made its
appearance in the form of a skeleton, as the King of Terrors is said to
be represented.--Your worship is free to laugh at this, if you think it
a proper subject for mirth; but men are alive who viewed it with their
own eyes, and the event showed too well of what misfortunes this
apparition was the singular prognostication."

"I have heard the story," said the knight; "but the monk who told it
me, suggested that the figure, though unhappily chosen, was perhaps
purposely introduced as a part of the pageant."

"I know not that," said the minstrel, dryly; "but there is no doubt
that shortly after this apparition King Alexander died, to the great
sorrow of his people. The Maid of Norway, his heiress, speedily
followed her grandfather to the grave, and our English king, Sir
Knight, raked up a claim of dependency and homage due, he said, by
Scotland, which neither the lawyers, nobles, priests, nor the very
minstrels of Scotland, had ever before heard of."

"Now, beshrew me," interrupted Sir Aymer de Valence, "this is beyond
bargain. I agreed to hear your tale with patience, but I did not pledge
myself that it should contain matter to the reproach of Edward the
First, of blessed memory; nor will I permit his name to be mentioned in
my hearing without the respect due his high rank and noble qualities."

"Nay," said the minstrel, "I am no highland bagpiper or genealogist, to
carry respect for my art so far as to quarrel with a man of worship who
stops me at the beginning of a pibroch. I am an Englishman, and wish
dearly well to my country; and, above all, I must speak the truth. But
I will avoid disputable topics. Your age, sir, though none of the
ripest, authorizes me to suppose you may have seen the battle of
Falkirk, and other onslaughts in which the competition of Bruce and
Baliol has been fiercely agitated, and you will permit me to say, that
if the Scottish have not had the right upon their side, they have at
least defended the wrong with the efforts of brave men and true."

"Of brave men I grant you," said the knight, "for I have seen no
cowards amongst them; but as for truth, they can best judge of it who
know how often they have sworn faith to England, and how repeatedly
they have broken their vow."

"I shall not stir the question," said the minstrel, "leaving it to your
worship to determine which has most falsehood--he who compels a weaker
person to take an unjust path, or he who, compelled by necessity, takes
the imposed oath without the intention of keeping his word."

"Nay, nay," said De Valence, "let us keep our opinions, for we are not
likely to force each other from the faith we have adopted on this
subject. But take my advice, and whilst thou travellest under an
English pennon, take heed that thou keepest off this conversation in
the hall and kitchen, where perhaps the soldier may be less tolerant
than the officer; and now, in a word, what is thy legend of this
Dangerous Castle?"

"For that," replied Bertram, "methinks your worship is most likely to
have a better edition than I, who have not been in this country for
many years; but it is not for me to bandy opinions with your
knightship. I will even proceed with the tale as I have heard it. I
need not, I presume, inform your worship that the Lords of Douglas, who
founded this castle, are second to no lineage in Scotland in the
antiquity of their descent. Nay, they have themselves boasted that
their family is not to be seen or distinguished, like other great
houses, until it is found at once in a certain degree of eminence. 'You
may see us in the tree,' they say, 'you cannot discover us in the twig;
you may see us in the stream, you cannot trace us to the fountain.' In
a word, they deny that historians or genealogists can point out the
first mean man named Douglas, who originally elevated the family; and
true it is, that so far back as we have known this race, they have
always been renowned for valour and enterprise, accompanied with the
power which made that enterprise effectual."

"Enough," said the knight, "I have heard of the pride and power of that
great family, nor does it interest me in the least to deny or detract
from their bold claims to consideration in this respect."

"Without doubt you must also have heard, noble sir," replied the
minstrel, "many things of James, the present heir of the house of
Douglas?" "More than enough," answered the English knight; "he is known
to have been a stout supporter of that outlawed traitor, William
Wallace; and again, upon the first raising of the banner by this Robert
Bruce, who pretends to be King of Scotland, this young springald, James
Douglas, must needs start into rebellion anew. He plunders his uncle,
the Archbishop of St. Andrews, of a considerable sum of money, to fill
the Scottish Usurper's not over-burdened treasury, debauches the
servants of his relation, takes arms, and though repeatedly chastised
in the field, still keeps his vaunt, and threatens mischief to those,
who, in the name of his rightful sovereign, defend the Castle of
Douglasdale."

"It is your pleasure to say so, Sir Knight," replied Bertram; "yet I am
sure, were you a Scot, you would with patience hear me tell over what
has been said of this young man by those who have known him, and whose
account of his adventures shows how differently the same tale may be
told. These men talk of the present heir of this ancient family as
fully adequate to maintain and augment its reputation; ready, indeed,
to undergo every peril in the cause of Robert the Bruce, because the
Bruce is esteemed by him his lawful king; and sworn and devoted, with
such small strength as he can muster, to revenge himself on those
Southrons who have, for several years, as he thinks, unjustly,
possessed themselves of his father's abode."

"O," replied Sir Aymer de Valence, "we have heard much of his
achievements in this respect, and of his threats against our governor
and ourselves; yet we think it scarce likely that Sir John de Walton
will move from Douglasdale without the King's order, although this
James Douglas, a mere chicken, take upon himself to crack his voice by
crowing like a cock of the game."

"Sir," answered Bertram, "our acquaintance is but brief, and yet I feel
it has been so beneficial to me, that I trust there is no harm, in
hoping that James Douglas and you may never meet in bodily presence
till the state of the two countries shall admit of peace being between
you."

"Thou art obliging, friend," answered Sir Aymer, "and, I doubt not,
sincere; and truly thou seemest to have a wholesome sense of the
respect due to this young knight, when men talk of him in his native
valley of Douglas. For me, I am only poor Aymer of Valence, without an
acre of land, or much hope of acquiring any, unless I cut something
huge with my broadsword out of the middle of these hills. Only this,
good minstrel, if thou livest to tell my story, may I pray thee to use
thy scrupulous custom of searching out the verity, and whether I live
or die thou shalt not, I think, discover that thy late acquaintance of
a spring morning hath added more to the laurels of James of Douglas,
than any man's death must give to him by whose stronger arm, or more
lucky chance, it is his lot to fall."

"I nothing fear you, Sir Knight," said the minstrel, "for yours is that
happy brain, which, bold in youth as beseems a young knight, is in more
advanced life the happy source of prudent counsel, of which I would
not, by an early death, wish thy country to be deprived."

"Thou art so candid, then, as to wish Old England the benefit of good
advice" said Sir Aymer, "though thou leanest to the side of Scotland in
the controversy?"

"Assuredly, Sir Knight," said the minstrel, "since in wishing that
Scotland and England each knew their own true interest, I am bound to
wish them both alike well; and they should, I think, desire to live in
friendship together. Occupying each their own portion of the same
island, and living under the same laws, and being at peace with each
other, they might without fear, face the enmity of the whole world."

"If thy faith be so liberal," answered the Knight, "as becomes a good
man, thou must certainly pray, Sir Minstrel, for the success of England
in the war, by which alone these murderous hostilities of the northern
nation can end in a solid peace. The rebellions of this obstinate
country are but the struggles of the stag when he is mortally wounded;
the animal grows weaker and weaker with every struggle, till his
resistance is effectually tamed by the hand of death."

"Not so, Sir Knight," said the minstrel; "if my creed is well taught
me, we ought not so to pray. We may, without offence, intimate in our
prayers the end we wish to obtain; but it is not for us, poor mortals,
to point out to an all-seeing Providence the precise manner in which
our petitions are to be accomplished, or to wish the downfall of a
country to end its commotions, as the death-stab terminates the agonies
of the wounded stag. Whether I appeal to my heart or to my
understanding, the dictate would be to petition Heaven for what is just
and equal in the case; and if I should fear for thee, Sir Knight, in an
encounter with James of Douglas, it is only because he upholds, as I
conceive, the better side of the debate; and powers more earthly have
presaged to him success."

"Do you tell me so, Sir Minstrel," said De Valence in a threatening
tone, "knowing me and my office?"

"Your personal dignity and authority" said Bertram, "cannot change the
right into wrong, or avert what Providence has decreed to take place.
You know, I must presume, that the Douglas hath, by various devices,
already contrived to make himself master of this Castle of Douglas
three several times, and that Sir John de Walton, the present governor,
holds it with a garrison trebled in force, and under the assurance that
if, without surprise, he should keep it from the Scottish power for a
year and a day, he shall obtain the barony of Douglas, with its
extensive appendages, in free property for his reward; while, on the
other hand, if he shall suffer the fortress during this space to be
taken, either by guile or by open force, as has happened successively
to the holders of the Dangerous Castle, he will become liable to
dishonour as a knight, and to attainder as a subject; and the chiefs
who take share with him, and serve under him, will participate also in
his guilt and his punishment?"

"All this I know well" said Sir Aymer; "and I only wonder that, having
become public, the conditions have, nevertheless, been told with so
much accuracy; but what has this to do with the issue of the combat, if
the Douglas and I should chance to meet? I will not surely be disposed
to fight with less animation because I wear my fortune upon my sword,
or become coward because I fight for a portion of the Douglas's estate,
as well as for fame and for fatherland? And after all"--

"Hear me," said the minstrel; "an ancient gleeman has said, that in a
false quarrel there is no true valour, and the _los_ or praise won
therein, is, when balanced against honest fame, as valueless as a
wreath formed out of copper, compared to a chaplet of pure gold; but I
bid you not take me for thy warrant in this important question. Thou
well knowest how James of Thirlwall, the last English commander before
Sir John de Walton, was surprised, and the castle sacked with
circumstances of great inhumanity."

"Truly," said Sir Aymer, "I think that Scotland and England both have
heard of that onslaught, and of the disgusting proceedings of the
Scottish chieftain, when he caused transport into the wild forest gold,
silver, ammunition, and armour, and all things that could be easily
removed, and destroyed a large quantity of provisions in a manner
equally savage and unheard-of."

"Perhaps, Sir Knight," said Bertram, "you were yourself an eyewitness
of that transaction, which has been spoken of far and wide, and is
called the Douglas Larder?"

"I saw not the actual accomplishment of the deed," said De Valence;
"that is, I witnessed it not a-doing, but I beheld enough of the sad
relics to make the Douglas Larder never by me to be forgotten as a
record of horror and abomination. I would speak it truly, by the hand
of my father and by my honour as a knight! and I will leave it to thee
to judge whether it was a deed calculated to secure the smiles of
Heaven in favour of the actors. This is my edition of the story:--

"A large quantity of provisions had during two years or thereabouts
been collected from different points, and the Castle of Douglas, newly
repaired, and, as was thought, carefully guarded, was appointed as the
place where the said provisions were to be put in store for the service
of the King of England, or of the Lord Clifford, whichever should first
enter the Western Marches with an English army, and stand in need of
such a supply. This army was also to relieve our wants, I mean those of
my uncle the Earl of Pembroke, who for some time before had lain with a
considerable force in the town called Ayr, near the old Caledonian
Forest, and where we had hot wars with the insurgent Scots. Well, sir,
it happened, as in similar cases, that Thirlwall, though a bold and
active soldier, was surprised in the Castle of Douglas, about
Hallowmass, by this same worthy, young James Douglas. In no very good
humour was he, as you may suppose; for his father, called William the
Hardy, or William Longlegs, having refused, on any terms, to become
Anglicized, was made a lawful prisoner, and died as such, closely
confined in Berwick, or, as some say, in Newcastle. The news of his
father's death had put young Douglas into no small rage, and tended, I
think, to suggest what he did in his resentment. Embarrassed by the
quantity of provisions which he found in the castle, which, the English
being superior in the country, he had neither the means to remove, nor
the leisure to stay and consume, the fiend, as I think, inspired him
with a contrivance to render them unfit for human use. You shall judge
yourself whether it was likely to be suggested by a good or an evil
spirit.

"According to this device, the gold, silver, and other transportable
commodities being carried to secret places of safety, Douglas caused
the meat, the malt, and other corn or grain, to be brought down into
the castle cellar, where he emptied the contents of the sacks into one
loathsome heap, striking out the heads of the barrels and puncheons, so
as to let the mingled drink run through the heap of meal, grain, and so
forth. The bullocks provided for slaughter were in like manner knocked
on the head, and their blood suffered to drain into the mass of edible
substances; and lastly, the flesh of these oxen was buried in the same
mass, in which was also included the dead bodies of those in the
castle, who, receiving no quarter from the Douglas, paid dear enough
for having kept no better watch. This base and unworthy abuse of
provisions intended for the use of man, together with throwing into the
well of the castle carcasses of men and horses, and other filth for
polluting the same, has since that time been called the DOUGLAS LARDER."

"I pretend not, good Sir Aymer," said the minstrel, "to vindicate what
you justly reprove, nor can I conceive any mode of rendering provisions
arranged after the form of the Douglas Larder, proper for the use of
any Christian; yet this young gentleman might perhaps act under the
sting of natural resentment, rendering his singular exploit more
excusable than it may seem at first. Think, if your own noble father
had just died in a lingering captivity, his inheritance seized upon,
and occupied as a garrison by a foreign enemy, would not these things
stir you to a mode of resentment, which in cold blood, and judging of
it as the action of an enemy, your honour might hold in natural and
laudable abhorrence?--Would you pay respect to dead and senseless
objects, which no one could blame your appropriating to your own use,
or even scruple the refusal of quarter to prisoners, which is so often
practised even in wars which are otherwise termed fair and humane?"

"You press me close, minstrel," said Aymer de Valence. "I at least have
no great interest to excuse the Douglas in this matter, since its
consequences were, that I myself, and the rest of my uncle's host,
laboured with Clifford and his army to rebuild this same Dangerous
Castle; and feeling no stomach for the cheer that the Douglas had left
us, we suffered hard commons, though I acknowledge we did not hesitate
to adopt for our own use such sheep and oxen as the miserable Scots had
still left around their farm-houses; and I jest not, Sir Minstrel, when
I acknowledge in sad earnest, that we martial men ought to make our
petitions with peculiar penitence to Heaven for mercy, when we reflect
on the various miseries which the nature of our profession compels us
to inflict on each other."

"It seems to me," answered the minstrel, "that those who feel the
stings of their own conscience should be more lenient when they speak
of the offences of others; nor do I greatly rely on a sort of prophecy
which was delivered, as the men of this hill district say, to the young
Douglas, by a man who in the course of nature should have been long
since dead, promising him a course of success against the English for
having sacrificed his own castle to prevent their making it a garrison."

"We have time enough for the story," said Sir Aymer, "and methinks it
would suit a knight and a minstrel better than the grave converse we
have hitherto held, which would have beseemed--so God save me--the
mouths of two travelling friars."

"So be it," said the minstrel; "the rote or the viol easily changes its
time and varies its note."





      A tale of sorrow, for your eyes may weep;
      A tale of horror, for your flesh may tingle;
      A tale of wonder, for the eyebrows arch,
      And the flesh curdles if you read it rightly
                                        OLD PLAY.


"Your honour must be informed, gentle Sir Aymer de Valence, that I have
heard this story told at a great distance from the land in which it
happened, by a sworn minstrel, the ancient friend and servant of the
house of Douglas, one of the best, it is said, who ever belonged to
that noble family. This minstrel, Hugo Hugonet by name, attended his
young master when on this fierce exploit, as was his wont.

"The castle was in total tumult; in one corner the war-men were busy
breaking up and destroying provisions; in another, they were slaying
men, horses, and cattle, and these actions were accompanied with
appropriate sounds. The cattle, particularly, had become sensible of
their impending fate, and with awkward resistance and piteous cries,
testified that reluctance with which these poor creatures look
instinctively on the shambles. The groans and screams of men,
undergoing, or about to undergo, the stroke of death, and the screeches
of the poor horses which were in mortal agony, formed a fearful chorus.
Hugonet was desirous to remove himself from such unpleasant sights and
sounds; but his master, the Douglas, had been a man of some reading,
and his old servant was anxious to secure a book of poetry, to which he
had been attached of old. This contained the Lays of an ancient
Scottish Bard, who, if an ordinary human creature while he was in this
life, cannot now perhaps be exactly termed such.

"He was, in short, that Thomas, distinguished by the name of the
Rhymer, and whose intimacy, it is said, became so great with the gifted
people, called the Faery folk, that he could, like them, foretell the
future deed before it came to pass, and united in his own person the
quality of bard and of soothsayer. But of late years he had vanished
almost entirely from this mortal scene; and although the time and
manner of his death were never publicly known, yet the general belief
was, that he was not severed from the land of the living, but removed
to the land of Faery, from whence he sometimes made excursions, and
concerned himself only about matters which were to come hereafter.
Hugonet was the more earnest to prevent the loss of the works of this
ancient bard, as many of his poems and predictions were said to be
preserved in the castle, and were supposed to contain much especially
connected with the old house of Douglas, as well as other families of
ancient descent, who had been subjects of this old man's prophecy; and
accordingly he determined to save this volume from destruction in the
general conflagration to which the building was about to be consigned
by the heir of its ancient proprietors. With this view he hurried up
into the little old vaulted room, called 'the Douglas's study,' in
which there might be some dozen old books written by the ancient
chaplains, in what the minstrels call _the letter black_. He
immediately discovered the celebrated lay, called Sir Tristrem, which
has been so often altered and abridged as to bear little resemblance to
the original. Hugonet, who well knew the value in which this poem was
held by the ancient lords of the castle, took the parchment volume from
the shelves of the library, and laid it upon a small desk adjacent to
the Baron's chair. Having made such preparation for putting it in
safety, he fell into a brief reverie, in which the decay of light, and
the preparations for the Douglas Larder, but especially the last sight
of objects which had been familiar to his eyes, now on the eve of
destruction, engaged him at that moment.

"The bard, therefore, was thinking within himself upon the uncommon
mixture of the mystical scholar and warrior in his old master, when, as
he bent his eyes upon the book of the ancient Rhymer, he was astonished
to observe it slowly removed from the desk on which it lay by an
invisible hand. The old man looked with horror at the spontaneous
motion of the book, for the safety of which he was interested, and had
the courage to approach a little nearer the table, in order to discover
by what means it had been withdrawn.

"I have said the room was already becoming dark, so as to render it
difficult to distinguish any person in the chair, though it now
appeared, on closer examination, that a kind of shadowy outline of a
human form was seated in it, but neither precise enough to convey its
exact figure to the mind, nor so detailed as to intimate distinctly its
mode of action. The Bard of Douglas, therefore, gazed upon the object
of his fear, as if he had looked upon something not mortal;
nevertheless, as he gazed more intently, he became more capable of
discovering the object which offered itself to his eyes, and they grew
by degrees more keen to penetrate what they witnessed. A tall thin
form, attired in, or rather shaded with, a long flowing dusky robe,
having a face and physiognomy so wild and overgrown with hair as to be
hardly human, were the only marked outlines of the phantom; and,
looking more attentively, Hugonet was still sensible of two other
forms, the outlines, it seemed, of a hart and a hind, which appeared
half to shelter themselves behind the person and under the robe of this
supernatural figure."

"A probable tale," said the knight, "for you, Sir Minstrel, a man of
sense as you seem to be, to recite so gravely! From what wise authority
have you had this tale, which, though it might pass well enough amid
clanging beakers, must be held quite apocryphal in the sober hours of
the morning?"

"By my minstrel word, Sir Knight," answered Bertram, "I am no
propagator of the fable, if it be one; Hugonet, the violer, when he had
retired into a cloister near the Lake of Pembelmere in Wales,
communicated the story to me as I now tell it. Therefore, as it was
upon the authority of an eyewitness, I apologize not for relating it to
you, since I could hardly discover a more direct source of knowledge."

"Be it so, Sir Minstrel," said the knight; "tell on thy tale, and may
thy legend escape criticism from others as well as from me."

"Hugonet, Sir Knight," answered Bertram, "was a holy man, and
maintained a fair character during his whole life, notwithstanding his
trade may be esteemed a light one. The vision spoke to him in an
antique language, like that formerly used in the kingdom of
Strath-Clyde, being a species of Scots or Gaelic, which few would have
comprehended.

"'You are a learned man,' said the apparition, 'and not unacquainted
with the dialects used in your country formerly, although they are now
out of date, and you are obliged to translate them into the vulgar
Saxon of Deira or Northumberland; but highly must an ancient British
bard prize one in this "remote term of time," who sets upon the poetry
of his native country a value which invites him to think of its
preservation at a moment of such terror as influences the present
evening.'

"'It is, indeed,' said Hugonet, 'a night of terror, that calls even the
dead from the grave, and makes them the ghastly and fearful companions
of the living--Who or what art thou, in God's name, who breakest the
bounds which divide them, and revisitest thus strangely the state thou
hast so long bid adieu to?'

"'I am,' replied the vision, 'that celebrated Thomas the Rhymer, by
some called Thomas of Erceldoun, or Thomas the True Speaker. Like other
sages, I am permitted at times to revisit the scenes of my former life,
nor am I incapable of removing the shadowy clouds and darkness which
overhang futurity; and know, thou afflicted man, that what thou now
seest in this woeful country, is not a general emblem of what shall
therein befall hereafter, but in proportion as the Douglasses are now
suffering the loss and destruction of their home for their loyalty to
the rightful heir of the Scottish kingdom, so hath Heaven appointed for
them a just reward; and as they have not spared to burn and destroy
their own house and that of their fathers in the Bruce's cause, so is
it the doom of Heaven, that as often as the walls of Douglas Castle
shall be burnt to the ground, they shall be again rebuilt still more
stately and more magnificent than before.'

"A cry was now heard like that of a multitude in the courtyard, joining
in a fierce shout of exultation; at the same time a broad and ruddy
glow seemed to burst from the beams and rafters, and sparks flew from
them as from the smith's stithy, while the element caught to its fuel,
and the conflagration broke its way through every aperture.

"'See ye that?' said the vision, casting his eye towards the windows
and disappearing--'Begone! The fated hour of removing this book is not
yet come, nor are thine the destined hands. But it will be safe where I
have placed it, and the time of its removal shall come.' The voice was
heard after the form had vanished, and the brain of Hugonet almost
turned round at the wild scene which he beheld; his utmost exertion was
scarcely sufficient to withdraw him from the terrible spot, and Douglas
Castle that night sunk into ashes and smoke, to arise, in no great
length of time, in a form stronger than ever." The minstrel stopt, and
his hearer, the English knight, remained silent for some minutes ere at
length he replied.

"It is true, minstrel," answered Sir Aymer, "that your tale is so far
undeniable, that this castle--three times burned down by the heir of
the house and of the barony--has hitherto been as often reared again by
Henry Lord Clifford, and other generals of the English, who endeavoured
on every occasion to build it up more artificially and more strongly
than it had formerly existed, since it occupies a position too
important to the safety of our Scottish border to permit our yielding
it up. This I myself have partly witnessed. But I cannot think, that
because the castle has been so destroyed, it is therefore decreed so to
be repaired in future, considering that such cruelties, as surely
cannot meet the approbation of Heaven, have attended the feats of the
Douglasses. But I see thou art determined to keep thine own faith, nor
can I blame thee, since the wonderful turns of fate which have attended
this fortress, are sufficient to warrant any one to watch for what seem
the peculiar indications of the will of Heaven; but thou mayst believe,
good minstrel, that the fault shall not be mine, if the young Douglas
shall have opportunity to exercise his cookery upon a second edition of
his family larder, or to profit by the predictions of Thomas the
Rhymer."

"I do not doubt due circumspection upon your own part and Sir John de
Walton's," said Bertram; "but there is no crime in my saying that
Heaven can accomplish its own purposes. I look upon Douglas Castle as
in some degree a fated place, and I long to see what changes time may
have made in it during the currency of twenty years. Above all, I
desire to secure, if possible, the volume of this Thomas of Erceldoun,
having in it such a fund of forgotten minstrelsy, and of prophecies
respecting the future fates of the British kingdom, both northern and
southern."

The knight made no answer, but rode a little space forward, keeping the
upper part of the ridge of the water, by which the road down the vale
seemed to be rather sharply conducted. It at length attained the summit
of an acclivity of considerable length. From this point, and behind a
conspicuous rock, which appeared to have been pushed aside, as it were,
like the scene of a theatre to admit a view of the under part of the
valley, the travellers beheld the extensive vale, parts of which have
been already shown in detail, but which, as the river became narrower,
was now entirely laid bare in its height and depth as far as it
extended, and displayed in its precincts, at a little distance from the
course of the stream, the towering and lordly castle to which it gave
the name. The mist which continued to encumber the valley with its
fleecy clouds, showed imperfectly the rude fortifications which served
to defend the small town of Douglas, which was strong enough to repel a
desultory attack, but not to withstand what was called in those days a
formal siege. The most striking feature was its church, an ancient
Gothic pile raised on an eminence in the centre of the town, and even
then extremely ruinous. To the left, and lying in the distance, might
be seen other towers and battlements; and divided from the town by a
piece of artificial water, which extended almost around it, arose the
Dangerous Castle of Douglas.

Sternly was it fortified, after the fashion of the middle ages, with
donjon and battlements; displaying, above others, the tall tower, which
bore the name of Lord Henry's, or the Clifford's Tower.

"Yonder is the castle," said Aymer de Valence, extending his arm with a
smile of triumph upon his brow; "thou mayst judge thyself, whether the
defences added to it under the Clifford are likely to render its next
capture a more easy deed than the last."

The minstrel barely shook his head, and quoted from the
Psalmist--"_Nisi Dominus custodiet_." Nor did he prosecute the
discourse, though De Valence answered eagerly, "My own edition of the
text is not very different from thine; but, methinks thou art more
spiritually-minded than can always be predicated of a wandering
minstrel."

"God knows," said Bertram, "that if I, or such as I, are forgetful of
the finger of Providence in accomplishing its purposes in this lower
world, we have heavier blame than that of other people, since we are
perpetually called upon, in the exercise of our fanciful profession, to
admire the turns of fate which bring good out of evil, and which render
those who think only of their own passions and purposes the executors
of the will of Heaven."

"I do submit to what you say, Sir Minstrel," answered the knight, "and
it would be unlawful to express any doubt of the truths which you speak
so solemnly, any more than of your own belief in them. Let me add, sir,
that I think I have power enough in this garrison to bid you welcome,
and Sir John de Walton, I hope, will not refuse access to hall, castle,
or knight's bower, to a person of your profession, and by whose
conversation we shall, perhaps, profit somewhat. I cannot, however,
lead you to expect such indulgence for your son, considering the
present state of his health; but if I procure him the privilege to
remain at the convent of Saint Bride, he will be there unmolested and
in safety, until you have renewed your acquaintance with Douglas Dale
and its history, and are disposed to set forward on your journey."

"I embrace your honour's proposal the more willingly," said the
minstrel, "that I can recompense the Father Abbot."

"A main point with holy men or women," replied De Valence, "who, in
time of warfare, subsist by affording the visitors of their shrine the
means of maintenance in their cloisters for a passing season."

The party now approached the sentinels on guard at the castle, who were
closely and thickly stationed, and who respectfully admitted Sir Aymer
de Valence, as next in command under Sir John de Walton. Fabian--for so
was the young squire named who attended on De Valence--mentioned it as
his master's pleasure that the minstrel should also be admitted. An old
archer, however, looked hard at the minstrel as he followed Sir Aymer.
"It is not for us," said he, "or any of our degree, to oppose the
pleasure of Sir Aymer do Valence, nephew to the Earl of Pembroke, in
such a matter; and for us, Master Fabian, welcomes are you to make the
gleeman your companion both at bed and board, as well as your visitant,
a week or two at the Castle of Douglas; but your worship is well aware
of the strict order of watch laid upon us, and if Solomon, King of
Israel, were to come here as a travelling minstrel, by my faith I durst
not give him entrance, unless I had positive authority from Sir John de
Walton."

"Do you doubt, sirrah," said Aymer de Valence, who returned on hearing
an altercation betwixt Fabian and the archer--"do you doubt that I have
good authority to entertain a guest, or do you presume to contest it?"

"Heaven forbid!" said the old man, "that I should presume to place my
own desire in opposition to your worship, who has so lately and so
honourably acquired your spurs; but in this matter I must think what
will be the wish of Sir John de Walton, who is your governor, Sir
Knight, as well as mine; and so far I hold it worth while to detain
your guest until Sir John return from a ride to the outposts of the
castle; and this, I conceive, being my duty, will be no matter of
offence to your worship."

"Methinks," said the knight, "it is saucy in thee to suppose that my
commands can have any thing in them improper, or contradictory to those
of Sir John de Walton; thou mayst trust to me at least that thou shalt
come to no harm. Keep this man in the guard-room; let him not want good
cheer, and when Sir John de Walton returns, report him as a person
admitted by my invitation, and if any thing more be wanted to make out
your excuse, I shall not be reluctant in stating it to the governor."

The archer made a signal of obedience with the pike which he held in
his hand, and resumed the grave and solemn manner of a sentinel upon
his post. He first, however, ushered in the minstrel, and furnished him
with food and liquor, speaking at the same time to Fabian, who remained
behind. The smart young stripling had become very proud of late, in
consequence of obtaining the name of Sir Aymer's squire, and advancing
a step in chivalry, as Sir Aymer himself had, somewhat earlier than the
usual period, been advanced from squire to knight.

"I tell thee, Fabian," said the old archer, (whose gravity, sagacity,
and skill in his vocation, while they gained him the confidence of all
in the castle, subjected him, as he himself said, occasionally to the
ridicule of the young coxcombs; and at the same time we may add,
rendered him somewhat pragmatic and punctilious towards those who stood
higher than himself in birth and rank;) "I tell thee, Fabian, thou wilt
do thy master, Sir Aymer, good service, if thou wilt give him a hint to
suffer an old archer, man-at-arms, or such like, to give him a fair and
civil answer respecting that which he commands; for undoubtedly it is
not in the first score of a man's years that he learns the various
proper forms of military service; and Sir John de Walton, a most
excellent commander no doubt, is one earnestly bent on pursuing the
strict line of his duty, and will be rigorously severe, as well,
believe me, with thy master as with a lesser person. Nay, he also
possesses that zeal for his duty which induces him to throw blame, if
there be the slightest ground for it, upon Aymer de Valence himself,
although his uncle, the Earl of Pembroke, was John de Walton's steady
patron, and laid the beginning of his good fortune; for all which, by
training up his nephew in the true discipline of the French wars, Sir
John has taken the best way of showing himself grateful to the eld
Earl."

"Be it as you will, old Gilbert Greenleaf," answered Fabian, "thou
knowest I never quarrel with thy sermonizing, and therefore give me
credit for submitting to many a lecture from Sir John de Walton and
thyself; but thou drivest this a little too far, if thou canst not let
a day pass without giving me a flogging. Credit me, Sir John de Walton
will not thank thee, if thou term him one too old to remember that he
himself had once some green sap in his veins. Ay, thus it is, the old
man will not forget that he has once been young, nor the young that he
must some day be old; and so the one changes his manners into the
lingering formality of advanced age, and the other remains like a
midsummer torrent swoln with rain, every drop of water in it noise,
froth, and overflow. There is a maxim for thee, Gilbert!--Heardest thou
ever better? hang it up amidst thy axioms of wisdom, and see if it will
not pass among them like fifteen to the dozen. It will serve to bring
thee off, man, when the wine-pot (thine only fault, good Gilbert) hath
brought thee on occasion into something of a scrape."

"Best keep it for thyself, good Sir Squire," said the old man;
"methinks it is more like to stand thyself one day in good stead. Who
ever heard of a knight, or of the wood of which a knight is made, and
that is a squire, being punished corporally like a poor old archer or
horseboy? Your worst fault will be mended by some of these witty
sayings, and your best service will scarce be rewarded more thankfully
than by giving thee the name of Fabian the Fabler, or some such witty
title."

Having unloosed his repartee to this extent, old Greenleaf resumed a
certain acidity of countenance, which may be said to characterise those
whose preferment hath become frozen under the influence of the slowness
of its progress, and who display a general spleen against such as have
obtained the advancement for which all are struggling, earlier, and, as
they suppose, with less merit than their own. From time to time the eye
of the old sentinel stole from the top of his pike, and with an air of
triumph rested upon the young man Fabian, as if to see how deeply the
wound had galled him, while at the same time he held himself on the
alert to perform whatever mechanical duty his post might require. Both
Fabian and his master were at the happy period of life when such
discontent as that of the grave archer affected them lightly, and, at
the very worst, was considered as the jest of an old man and a good
soldier; the more especially, as he was always willing to do the duty
of his companions, and was much trusted by Sir John de Walton, who,
though very much younger, had been bred up like Greenleaf in the wars
of Edward the First, and was tenacious in upholding strict discipline,
which, since the death of that great monarch, had been considerably
neglected by the young and warm-blooded valour of England.

Meantime it occurred to Sir Aymer de Valence, that though in displaying
the usual degree of hospitality shown, to such a man as Bertram, he had
merely done what was becoming his own rank, as one possessed of the
highest honours of chivalry--the self-styled minstrel might not in
reality be a man of that worth which he assumed. There was certainly
something in his conversation, at least more grave, if not more
austere, than was common to those of his calling; and when he
recollected many points of Sir John de Walton's minuteness, a doubt
arose in his mind, that the governor might not approve of his having
introduced into the castle a person of Bertram's character, who was
capable of making observations from which the garrison might afterwards
feel much danger and inconvenience. Secretly, therefore, he regretted
that he had not fairly intimated to the wandering minstrel, that his
reception, or that of any stranger, within the Dangerous Castle, was
not at present permitted by the circumstances of the times. In this
case, the express line of his duty would have been his vindication, and
instead, perhaps of discountenance and blame, he would have had praise
and honour from his superior.

With these thoughts passing through his mind, some tacit apprehension.
arose of a rebuke on the part of his commanding-officer; for this
officer, notwithstanding his strictness, Sir Aymer loved as well as
feared. He went, therefore, towards the guard-room of the castle, under
the pretence of seeing that the rites of hospitality had been duly
observed towards his late travelling companion. The minstrel arose
respectfully, and from the manner in which he paid his compliments,
seemed, if he had not expected this call of enquiry, at least to be in
no degree surprised at it. Sir Aymer, on the other hand, assumed an air
something more distant than he had yet used towards Bertram, and in
reverting to his former invitation, he now so far qualified it as to
say, that the minstrel knew that he was only second in command, and
that effectual permission to enter the castle ought to be sanctioned by
Sir John de Walton.

There is a civil way of seeming to believe any apology which people are
disposed to receive in payment, without alleging suspicion of its
currency. The minstrel, therefore, tendered his thanks for the civility
which had so far been shown to him. "It was a mere wish of passing
curiosity," he said, "which, if not granted, could be attended with no
consequences either inconvenient or disagreeable to him. Thomas of
Erceldoun was, according to the Welsh triads, _one of the three bards
of Britain_, who never stained a spear with blood, or was guilty either
of taking or retaking castles and fortresses, and thus far not a person
likely, after death, to be suspected of such warlike feats. But I can
easily conceive why Sir John de Walton should have allowed the usual
rites of hospitality to fall into disuse, and why a man of public
character like myself ought not to desire food or lodging where it is
accounted so dangerous; and it can surprise no one why the governor did
not even invest his worthy young lieutenant with the power of
dispensing with so strict and unusual a rule."

These words, very coolly spoken, had something of the effect of
affronting the young knight, as insinuating, that he was not held
sufficiently trustworthy by Sir John de Walton, with whom he had lived
on terms of affection and familiarity, though the governor had attained
his thirtieth year and upwards, and his lieutenant did not yet write
himself one-and-twenty, the full age of chivalry having been in his
case particularly dispensed with, owing to a feat of early manhood. Ere
he had fully composed the angry thoughts which were chafing in his
mind, the sound of a hunting bugle was heard at the gate, and from the
sort of general stir which it spread through the garrison, it was plain
that the governor had returned from his ride. Every sentinel, seemingly
animated by his presence, shouldered his pike more uprightly, gave the
word of the post more sharply, and seemed more fully awake and
conscious of his duty. Sir John de Walton having alighted from his
horse, asked Greenleaf what had passed during his absence; the old
archer thought it his duty to say that a minstrel, who seemed like a
Scotchman, or wandering borderer, had been admitted into the castle,
while his son, a lad sick of the pestilence so much talked of, had been
left for a time at the Abbey of Saint Bride. This he said on Fabian's
information. The archer added, that the father was a man of tale and
song, who could keep the whole garrison amused, without giving them
leave to attend to their own business.

"We want no such devices to pass the time," answered the governor; "and
we would have been better satisfied if our lieutenant had been pleased
to find us other guests, and fitter for a direct and frank
communication, than one who, by his profession, is a detractor of God
and a deceiver of man."

"Yet," said the old soldier, who could hardly listen even to his
commander without indulging the humour of contradiction, "I have heard
your honour intimate that the trade of a minstrel, when it is justly
acted up to, is as worthy as even the degree of knighthood itself."

"Such it may have been in former days," answered the knight; "but in
modern minstrelsy, the duty of rendering the art an incentive to virtue
is forgotten, and it is well if the poetry which fired our fathers to
noble deeds, does not now push on their children to such as are base
and unworthy. But I will speak upon this to my friend Aymer, than whom
I do not know a more excellent, or a more high-spirited young man."

While discoursing with the archer in this manner, Sir John de Walton,
of a tall and handsome figure, advanced and stood within the ample arch
of the guard-room chimney, and was listened to in reverential silence
by trusty Gilbert, who filled up with nods and signs, as an attentive
auditor, the pauses in the conversation. The conduct of another hearer
of what passed was not equally respectful, but, from his position, he
escaped observation.

This third person was no other than the squire Fabian, who was
concealed from observation by his position behind the hob, or
projecting portion of the old-fashioned fireplace, and hid himself yet
more carefully when he heard the conversation between the governor and
the archer turn to the prejudice, as he thought, of his master. The
squire's employment at this time was the servile task of cleaning Sir
Aymer's arms, which was conveniently performed by heating, upon the
projection already specified, the pieces of steel armour for the usual
thin coating of varnish. He could not, therefore, if he should be
discovered, be considered as guilty of any thing insolent or
disrespectful. He was better screened from view, as a thick smoke arose
from a quantity of oak panelling, carved in many cases with the crest
and achievements of the Douglas family, which being the fuel nearest at
hand, lay smouldering in the chimney, and gathering to a blaze.

The governor, unconscious of this addition to his audience, pursued his
conversation, with Gilbert Greenleaf: "I need not tell you," he said,
"that I am interested in the speedy termination of this siege or
blockade, with which Douglas continues to threaten us; my own honour
and affections are engaged in keeping this Dangerous Castle safe in
England's behalf, but I am troubled at the admission of this stranger;
and young De Valence would have acted more strictly in the line of his
duty, if he had refused to this wanderer any communication with this
garrison without my permission."

"Pity it is," replied old Greenleaf, shaking his head, "that this
good-natured and gallant young knight is somewhat drawn aside by the
rash advices of his squire, the boy Fabian, who has bravery, but as
little steadiness in him as a bottle of fermented small beer."

"Now hang thee," thought Fabian to himself, "for an old relic of the
wars, stuffed full of conceit and warlike terms, like the soldier who,
to keep himself from the cold, has lapped himself so close in a
tattered ensign for a shelter, that his very outside may show nothing
but rags and blazonry."

"I would not think twice of the matter, were the party less dear to
me," said Sir John de Walton. "But I would fain be of use to this young
man, even although I should purchase his improvement in military
knowledge at the expense of giving him a little pain. Experience
should, as it were, be burnt in upon the mind of a young man, and not
merely impressed by marking the lines of his chart out for him with
chalk; I will remember the hint you, Greenleaf, have given, and take an
opportunity of severing these two young men; and though I most dearly
love the one, and am far from wishing ill to the other, yet at present,
as you well hint, the blind is leading the blind, and the young knight
has for his assistant and counsellor too young a squire, and that must
be amended."

"Marry! out upon thee, old palmer-worm!" said the page within himself;
"have I found thee in the very fact of maligning myself and my master,
as it is thy nature to do towards all the hopeful young buds of
chivalry? If it were not to dirty the arms of an _eleve_ of chivalry,
by measuring them with one of thy rank, I might honour thee with a
knightly invitation to the field, while the scandal which thou hast
spoken is still foul upon thy tongue; as it is, thou shalt not carry
one kind of language publicly in the castle, and another before the
governor, upon the footing of having served with him under the banner
of Longshanks. I will carry to my master this tale of thine evil
intentions; and when we have concerted together, it shall appear
whether the youthful spirits of the garrison or the grey beards are
most likely to be the hope and protection, of this same Castle of
Douglas."

It is enough to say that Fabian pursued his purpose, in carrying to his
master, and in no very good humour, the report of what had passed
between Sir John de Walton and the old soldier. He succeeded in
representing the whole as a formal offence intended to Sir Aymer de
Valence; while all that the governor did to remove the suspicions
entertained by the young knight, could not in any respect bring him to
take a kindly view of the feelings of his commander towards him. He
retained the impression which he had formed from Fabian's recital of
what he had heard, and did not think he was doing Sir John de Walton
any injustice, in supposing him desirous to engross the greatest share
of the fame acquired in the defence of the castle, and thrusting back
his companions, who might reasonably pretend to a fair portion of it.

The mother of mischief, says a Scottish proverb, is no bigger than a
midge's wing. [Footnote: i.e. Gnat's wing] In this matter of quarrel,
neither the young man nor the older knight had afforded each other any
just cause of offence. De Walton was a strict observer of military
discipline, in which he had been educated from his extreme youth, and
by which he was almost as completely ruled as by his natural
disposition; and his present situation added force to his original
education.

Common report had even exaggerated the military skill, the love of
adventure, and the great variety of enterprise, ascribed to James, the
young Lord of Douglas. He had, in the eyes of this Southern garrison,
the faculties of a fiend, rather than those of a mere mortal; for if
the English soldiers cursed the tedium of the perpetual watch and ward
upon the Dangerous Castle, which admitted of no relaxation from the
severity of extreme duty, they agreed that a tall form was sure to
appear to them with a battle-axe in his hand, and entering into
conversation in the most insinuating manner, never failed, with an
ingenuity and eloquence equal to that of a fallen spirit, to recommend
to the discontented sentinel some mode in which, by giving his
assistance to betray the English, he might set himself at liberty. The
variety of these devices, and the frequency of their recurrence, kept
Sir John de Walton's anxiety so perpetually upon the stretch, that he
at no time thought himself exactly out of the Black Douglas's reach,
any more than the good Christian supposes himself out of reach of the
wiles of the Devil; while every new temptation, instead of confirming
his hope, seems to announce that the immediate retreat of the Evil One
will be followed by some new attack yet more cunningly devised. Under
this general state of anxiety and apprehension, the temper of the
governor changed somewhat for the worse, and they who loved him best,
regretted most that he became addicted to complain of the want of
diligence on the part of those, who, neither invested with
responsibility like his, nor animated by the hope of such splendid
rewards, did not entertain the same degree of watchful and incessant
suspicion as himself. The soldiers muttered that the vigilance of their
governor was marked with severity; the officers and men of rank, of
whom there were several, as the castle was a renowned school of arms,
and there was a certain merit attained even by serving within its
walls, complained, at the same time, that Sir John de Walton no longer
made parties for hunting, for hawking, or for any purpose which might
soften the rigours of warfare, and suffered nothing to go forward but
the precise discipline of the castle. On the other hand, it may be
usually granted that the castle is well kept where the governor is a
disciplinarian; and where feuds and personal quarrels are found in the
garrison, the young men are usually more in fault than those whose
greater experience has convinced them of the necessity of using the
strictest precautions.

A generous mind--and such was Sir John de Walton's--is often in this
way changed and corrupted by the habit of over-vigilance, and pushed
beyond its natural limits of candour. Neither was Sir Aymer de Valence
free from a similar change; suspicion, though from a different cause,
seemed also to threaten to bias his open and noble disposition, in
those qualities which had hitherto been proper to him. It was in vain
that Sir John de Walton studiously sought opportunities to give his
younger friend indulgences, which at times were as far extended as the
duty of the garrison permitted. The blow was struck; the alarm had been
given to a proud and fiery temper on both sides; and while De Valence
entertained an opinion that he was unjustly suspected by a friend, who
was in several respects bound to him, De Walton, on the other hand, was
led to conceive that a young man, of whom he took a charge as
affectionate as if he had been a son of his own, and who owed to his
lessons what he knew of warfare, and what success he had obtained in
life, had taken offence at trifles, and considered himself ill-treated
on very inadequate grounds. The seeds of disagreement, thus sown
between them, failed not, like the tares sown by the Enemy among the
wheat, to pass from one class of the garrison to another; the soldiers,
though without any better reason than merely to pass the time, took
different sides between their governor and his young lieutenant; and so
the ball of contention being once thrown up between them, never lacked
some arm or other to keep it in motion.





     Alas! they had been friends in youth;
     But whispering tongues can poison truth;
     And constancy lives in realms above;
       And life is thorny, and youth is vain;
     And to be wroth with one we love,
       Doth work like madness in' the brain.
      *   *   *   *   *   *
     Each spoke words of high disdain,
     And insult to his heart's dear brother,
     But never either found another
     To free the hollow heart from paining--
     They stood aloof, the scars remaining,
       Like cliffs which had been rent asunder;
     A dreary sea now flows between,
       But neither heat, nor frost, nor thunder,
     Shall wholly do away, I ween,
     The marks of that which once hath been.
                      CHRISTABELLE OF COLERIDGE.


In prosecution of the intention which, when his blood was cool, seemed
to him wisest, Sir John de Walton resolved that he would go to the
verge of indulgence with his lieutenant and his young officers, furnish
them with every species of amusement which the place rendered possible,
and make them ashamed of their discontent, by overloading them with
courtesy. The first time, therefore, that he saw Aymer de Valence after
his return to the castle, he addressed him in high spirits, whether
real or assumed.

"What thinkest thou, my young friend," said De Walton, "if we try some
of the woodland sports proper, they say, to this country? There are
still in our neighbourhood some herds of the Caledonian breed of wild
cattle, which are nowhere to be found except among the moorlands--the
black and rugged frontier of what was anciently called the Kingdom of
Strath-Clyde. There are some hunters, too, who have been accustomed to
the sport, and who vouch that these animals are by far the most bold
and fierce subjects of chase in the island of Britain."

"You will do as you please," replied Sir Aymer, coldly; "but it is not
I, Sir John, who would recommend, for the sake of a hunting-match, that
you should involve the whole garrison in danger; you know best the
responsibilities incurred by your office here, and no doubt must have
heedfully attended to them before making a proposal of such a nature."

"I do indeed know my own duty," replied De Walton, offended in turn,
"and might be allowed to think of yours also, without assuming more
than my own share of responsibility; but it seems to me as if the
commander of this Dangerous Castle, among other inabilities, were, as
old people in this country say, subjected to a spell--and one which
renders it impossible for him to guide his conduct so as to afford
pleasure to those whom he is most desirous to oblige. Not a great many
weeks since, whose eyes would have sparkled like those of Sir Aymer de
Valence at the proposal of a general hunting-match after a new object
of game; and now what is his bearing when such sport is proposed,
merely, I think, to disappoint my purpose of obliging him?--a cold
acquiescence drops half frozen from his lips, and he proposes to go to
rouse the wild cattle with an air of gravity, as if he were undertaking
a pilgrimage to the tomb of a martyr."

"Not so, Sir John," answered the young knight. "In our present
situation we stand conjoined in more charges than one, and although the
greater and controlling trust is no doubt laid upon you as the elder
and abler knight, yet still I feel that I myself have my own share of a
serious responsibility. I trust, therefore, you will indulgently hear
my opinion, and bear with it, even though it should appear to have
relation to that part of our common charge which is more especially
intrusted to your keeping. The dignity of knighthood, which I have the
honour to share with you, the _accolade_ laid on my shoulder by the
royal Plantagenet, entitles me, methinks, to so much grace."

"I cry you mercy," said the elder cavalier; "I forgot how important a
person I had before me, dubbed by King Edward himself, who was moved no
doubt by special reasons to confer such an early honour; and I
certainly feel that I overstep my duty when I propose any thing that
savours like idle sport to a person of such grave pretensions."

"Sir John de Walton," retorted De Valence, "we have had something too
much of this--let it stop here. All that I mean to say is, that in this
wardship of Douglas Castle, it will not be by my consent, if any
amusement, which distinctly infers a relaxation of discipline, be
unnecessarily engaged in, and especially such as compels us to summon
to our assistance a number of the Scots, whose evil disposition towards
us we well know; nor will I, though my years have rendered me liable to
such suspicion, suffer any thing of this kind to be imputed to me; and
if unfortunately--though I am sure I know not why--we are in future to
lay aside those bonds of familiar friendship which formerly linked us
to each other, yet I see no reason why we should not bear ourselves in
our necessary communications like knights and gentlemen, and put the
best construction on each other's motives, since there can be no reason
for imputing the worst to any thing that comes from either of us."

"You may be right, Sir Aymer de Valence," said the governor, bending
stiffly: "and since you say we are no longer bound to each other as
friends, you may be certain, nevertheless, that I will never permit a
hostile feeling, of which you are the object, to occupy my bosom. You
have been long, and I hope not uselessly, my pupil in the duties of
chivalry. You are the near relation of the Earl of Pembroke, my kind
and constant patron; and if these circumstances are well weighed, they
form a connexion which it would be difficult, at least for me, to break
through. If you feel yourself, as you seem to intimate, less strictly
tied by former obligations, you must take your own choice in fixing our
relations towards each other."

"I can only say," replied De Valence, "that my conduct will naturally
be regulated by your own; and you, Sir John, cannot hope more devoutly
than I do that our military duties may be fairly discharged, without
interfering with our friendly intercourse."

The knights here parted, after a conference which once or twice had
very nearly terminated in a full and cordial explanation; but still
there was wanting one kind heartfelt word from either to break, as it
were, the ice which was fast freezing upon their intercourse, and
neither chose to be the first in making the necessary advances with
sufficient cordiality, though each would have gladly done so, had the
other appeared desirous of meeting it with the same ardour; but their
pride was too high, and prevented either from saying what might at once
have put them upon an open and manly footing. They parted, therefore,
without again returning to the subject of the proposed diversion; until
it was afterwards resumed in a formal note, praying Sir Aymer de
Valence to accompany the commandant of Douglas Castle upon a solemn
hunting-match, which had for its object the wild cattle of the
neighbouring dale.

The time of meeting was appointed at six in the morning, beyond the
gate of the outer barricade; and the chase was declared to be ended in
the afternoon, when the _recheat_ should be blown beneath the great
oak, known by the name of Sholto's Club, which stood a remarkable
object, where Douglas Dale was bounded by several scattered trees, the
outskirts of the forest and hill country. The usual warning was sent
out to the common people, or vassals of the district, which they,
notwithstanding their feeling of antipathy, received in general with
delight, upon the great Epicurean principle of _carpe diem_, that is to
say, in whatever circumstances it happens to present itself, be sure
you lose no recreation which life affords. A hunting-match has still
its attractions, even though an English knight take his pleasure in the
woods of the Douglas.

It was no doubt afflicting to these faithful vassals, to acknowledge
another lord than the redoubted Douglas, and to wait by wood and river
at the command of English officers, and in the company of their
archers, whom they accounted their natural enemies. Still it was the
only species of amusement which had been permitted them for a long
time, and they were not disposed to omit the rare opportunity of
joining in it. The chase of the wolf, the wild boar, or even the timid
stag, required silvan arms; the wild cattle still more demanded this
equipment of war-bows and shafts, boar-spears and sharp swords, and
other tools of the chase similar to those used in actual war.
Considering this, the Scottish inhabitants were seldom allowed to join
in the chase, except under regulations as to number and arms, and
especially in preserving a balance of force on the side of the English
soldiers, which was very offensive to them. The greater part of the
garrison was upon such occasions kept on foot, and several detachments,
formed according to the governor's direction, were stationed in
different positions in case any quarrel should suddenly break out.





     The drivers thorough the wood went,
       For to raise the deer;
     Bowmen bickered upon the bent,
       With their broad arrows clear.

     The wylde thorough the woods went,
       On every side shear;
     Grehounds thorough the groves glent,
       For to kill thir deer.
                        BALLAD OF CHEVY CHASE, _Old Edit_.


The appointed morning came in cold and raw, after the manner of the
Scottish March weather. Dogs yelped, yawned, and shivered, and the
huntsmen, though hardy and cheerful in expectation of the day's sport,
twitched their mauds, or Lowland plaids, close to their throats, and
looked with some dismay at the mists which floated about the horizon,
now threatening to sink down on the peaks and ridges of prominent
mountains, and now to shift their position under the influence of some
of the uncertain gales, which rose and fell alternately, as they swept
along the valley.

Nevertheless, the appearance of the whole formed, as is usual in almost
all departments of the chase, a gay and a jovial spectacle. A brief
truce seemed to have taken place between the nations, and the Scottish
people appeared for the time rather as exhibiting the sports of their
mountains in a friendly manner to the accomplished knights and bonny
archers of Old England, than as performing a feudal service, neither
easy nor dignified in itself, at the instigation of usurping
neighbours. The figures of the cavaliers, now half seen, now exhibited
fully, and at the height, of strenuous exertion, according to the
character of the dangerous and broken ground, particularly attracted
the attention of the pedestrians, who, leading the dogs or beating the
thickets, dislodged such objects of chase as they found in the dingles,
and kept their eyes fixed upon their companions, rendered more
remarkable from being mounted, and the speed at which they urged their
horses; the disregard of all accidents being as perfect as
Melton-Mowbray itself, or any other noted field of hunters of the
present day, can exhibit.

The principles on which modern and ancient hunting were conducted, are,
however, as different as possible. A fox, or even a hare is, in our own
day, considered as a sufficient apology for a day's exercise to forty
or fifty dogs, and nearly as many men and horses; but the ancient
chase, even though not terminating, as it often did, in battle, carried
with it objects more important, and an interest immeasurably more
stirring. If indeed one species of exercise can be pointed out as more
universally exhilarating and engrossing than others, it is certainly
that of the chase. The poor over-laboured drudge, who has served out
his day of life, and wearied all his energies in the service of his
fellow-mortals--he who has been for many years the slave of
agriculture, or (still worse) of manufactures, engaged in raising a
single peck of corn from year to year, or in the monotonous labours of
the desk--can hardly remain dead to the general happiness when the
chase sweeps past him with hound and horn, and for a moment feels all
the exultation of the proudest cavalier who partakes the amusement. Let
any one who has witnessed the sight recall to his imagination the
vigour and lively interest which he has seen inspired into a village,
including the oldest and feeblest of its inhabitants. In the words of
Wordsworth, it is, on such occasions,

    "Up, Timothy, up with your staff and away,
     Not a soul will remain in the village to-day;
     The hare has just started from Hamilton's grounds,
     And Skiddaw is glad with the cry of the hounds."

But compare those inspiring sounds to the burst of a whole feudal
population enjoying the sport, whose lives, instead of being spent in
the monotonous toil of modern avocations, have been agitated by the
hazards of war, and of the chase, its near resemblance, and you must
necessarily suppose that the excitation is extended, like a fire which
catches to dry heath. To use the common expression, borrowed from
another amusement, all is fish that comes in the net on such occasions.
An ancient hunting-match (the nature of the carnage excepted) was
almost equal to a modern battle, when the strife took place on the
surface of a varied and unequal country. A whole district poured forth
its inhabitants, who formed a ring of great extent, called technically,
a tinchel, and, advancing and narrowing their circle by degrees, drove
before them the alarmed animals of every kind; all and each of which,
as they burst from the thicket or the moorland, were objects of the
bow, the javelin, or whatever missile weapons the hunters possessed;
while others were run down and worried by large greyhounds, or more
frequently brought to bay, when the more important persons present
claimed for themselves the pleasure of putting them to death with their
chivalrous hands, incurring individually such danger as is inferred
from a mortal contest even with the timid buck, when he is brought to
the death-struggle, and has no choice but yielding his life or putting
himself upon the defensive, by the aid of his splendid antlers, and
with all the courage of despair.

The quantity of game found in Douglas Dale on this occasion was very
considerable, for, as already noticed, it was a long time since a
hunting upon a great scale had been attempted under the Douglasses
themselves, whose misfortunes had commenced several years before, with
those of their country. The English garrison, too, had not sooner
judged themselves strong or numerous enough to exercise these valued
feudal privileges. In the meantime, the game increased considerably.
The deer, the wild cattle, and the wild boars, lay near the foot of the
mountains, and made frequent irruptions into the lower part of the
valley, which in Douglas Dale bears no small resemblance to an oasis,
surrounded by tangled woods, and broken moors, occasionally rocky, and
showing large tracts of that bleak dominion to which wild creatures
gladly escape when pressed by the neighbourhood of man.

As the hunters traversed the spots which separated the field from the
wood, there was always a stimulating uncertainty what sort of game was
to be found, and the marksman, with his bow ready bent, or his javelin
poised, and his good and well-bitted horse thrown upon its haunches,
ready for a sudden start, observed watchfully what should rush from the
covert, so that, were it deer, boar, wolf, wild cattle, or any other
species of game, he might be in readiness.

The wolf, which, on account of its ravages, was the most obnoxious of
the beasts of prey, did not, however, supply the degree of diversion
which his name promised; he usually fled far--in some instances many
miles--before he took courage to turn to bay, and though formidable at
such moments, destroying both dogs and men by his terrible bite, yet at
other times was rather despised for his cowardice. The boar, on the
other hand, was a much more irascible and courageous animal.

The wild cattle, the most formidable of all the tenants of the ancient
Caledonian forest, were, however, to the English cavaliers, by far the
most interesting objects of pursuit. [Footnote: These Bulls are thus
described by Hector Boetius, concerning whom he says--"In this wood
(namely the Caledonian wood) were sometime white bulls, with crisp and
curling manes, like fierce lions; and though they seemed meek and tame
in the remanent figure of their bodies, they were more wild than any
other beasts, and had such hatred against the society and company of
men, that they never came in the woods nor lesuries where they found
any foot or hand thereof, and many days after they eat not of the herbs
that were touched or handled by man. These bulls were so wild, that
they were never taken but by slight and crafty labour, and so
impatient, that after they were taken they died from insupportable
dolour. As soon as any man, invaded these bulls, they rushed with such,
terrible press upon him that they struck him to the earth, taking no
fear of hounds, sharp lances, or other most penetrative
weapons."--_Boetius, Chron. Scot_. Vol. I. page xxxix.

The wild cattle of this breed, which are now only known in one manor in
England, that of Chillingham Castle, in Northumberland, (the seat of
the Earl of Tankerville,) were, in the memory of man, still preserved
in three places in Scotland, namely, Drumlanrig, Cumbernauld, and the
upper park at Hamilton Palace, at all of which places, except the last,
I believe, they have now been destroyed, on account of their ferocity.
But though those of modern days are remarkable for their white colour,
with black muzzles, and exhibiting, in a small degree, the black mane,
about three or four inches long, by which the bulls in particular are
distinguished, they do not by any means come near the terrific
description given us by the ancient authors, which has made some
naturalists think that these animals should probably be referred to a
different species, though possessing the same general habits, and
included in the same genus. The bones, which are often discovered in
Scottish mosses, belong certainly to a race of animals much larger than
those of Chillingham, which seldom grow to above 80 stone (of 14 lbs.),
the general weight varying from 60 to 80 stone. We should be accounted
very negligent by one class of readers, did we not record that the beef
furnished by those cattle is of excellent flavour, and finely marbled.

[The following is an extract from, a letter received by Sir Walter
Scott, some time after the publication of the novel.--

"When it is wished to kill any of the cattle at Chillingham, the keeper
goes into the herd on horseback, in which way they are quite
accessible, and singling out his victim, takes aim with a large
rifle-gun, and seldom fails in bringing him down. If the poor animal
makes much bellowing in his agony, and especially if the ground be
stained with his blood, his companions become very furious, and are
themselves, I believe, accessory to his death. After which, they fly
off to a distant part of the park, and he is drawn away on a sledge.
Lord Tankerville is very tenacious of these singular animals; he will
on no account part with a living one, and hardly allows of a sufficient
number being killed, to leave pasturage for those that remain.

"It happened on one occasion, three or four years ago, that a party
visiting at the castle, among whom were some men of war, who had hunted
buffaloes in foreign parts, obtained permission to do the keeper's
work, and shoot one of the wild cattle. They sallied out on horseback,
and duly equipped for the enterprise, attacked their object. The poor
animal received several wounds, but none of them proving fatal, he
retired before his pursuers, roaring with pain and rage, till, planting
himself against a wall or tree, he stood at bay, offering a front of
defiance. In this position the youthful heir of the castle, Lord
Ossulston, rode up to give him the fatal shot. Though warned of the
danger of approaching near to the enraged animal, and especially of
firing without first having turned his horse's head in a direction to
be ready for flight, he discharged his piece; but ere he could turn his
horse round to make his retreat, the raging beast had plunged his
immense horns into its flank. The horse staggered and was near falling,
but recovering by a violent effort, he extricated himself from his
infuriated pursuer, making off with all the speed his wasting strength
supplied, his entrails meanwhile dragging on the ground, till at length
he fell, and died at the same moment. The animal was now close upon his
rear, and the young Lord would unquestionably have shared the fate of
his unhappy steed, had not the keeper, deeming it full time to conclude
the day's diversion, fired at the instant. His shot brought the beast
to the ground, and running in with his large knife, he put a period to
his existence.

"This scene of gentlemanly pastime was viewed from a turret of the
castle by Lady Tankerville and her female visitors. Such a situation
for the mother of the young hero, was anything but enviable."]]
Altogether, the ringing of bugles, the clattering of horses' hoofs, the
lowing and bellowing of the enraged mountain cattle, the sobs of deer
mingled by throttling dogs, the wild shouts of exultation of the
men,--made a chorus which extended far through the scene in which it
arose, and seemed to threaten the inhabitants of the valley even in its
inmost recesses.

During the course of the hunting, when a stag or a boar was expected,
one of the wild cattle often came rushing forward, bearing down the
young trees, crashing the branches in its progress, and in general
dispersing whatever opposition was presented to it by the hunters. Sir
John de Walton was the only one of the chivalry of the party who
individually succeeded in mastering one of these powerful animals. Like
a Spanish tauridor, he bore down and killed with his lance a ferocious
bull; two well-grown calves and three kine were also slain, being
unable to carry off the quantity of arrows, javelins, and other
missiles, directed against them by the archers and drivers; but many
others, in spite of every endeavour to intercept them, escaped to their
gloomy haunts in the remote skirts of the mountain called Cairntable,
with their hides well feathered with those marks of human enmity.

A large portion of the morning was spent in this way, until a
particular blast from the master of the hunt announced that he had not
forgot the discreet custom of the repast, which, on such occasions, was
provided for upon a scale proportioned to the multitude who had been
convened to attend the sport.

The blast peculiar to the time, assembled the whole party in an open
space in a wood, where their numbers had room and accommodation to sit
down upon the green turf, the slain game affording a plentiful supply
for roasting or broiling, an employment in which the lower class were
all immediately engaged; while puncheons and pipes, placed in
readiness, and scientifically opened, supplied Gascoigne wine, and
mighty ale, at the pleasure of those who chose to appeal to them.

The knights, whose rank did not admit of interference, were seated by
themselves, and ministered to by their squires and pages, to whom such
menial services were not accounted disgraceful, but, on the contrary, a
proper step of their education. The number of those distinguished
persons seated upon the present occasion at the table of dais, as it
was called, (in virtue of a canopy of green boughs with which it was
overshadowed,) comprehended Sir John de Walton, Sir Aymer de Valance,
and some reverend brethren dedicated to the service of Saint Bride,
who, though Scottish ecclesiastics, were treated with becoming respect
by the English soldiers. One or two Scottish retainers, or vavasours,
maintaining, perhaps in prudence, a suitable deference to the English
knights, sat at the bottom of the table, and as many English archers,
peculiarly respected by their superiors, were invited, according to the
modern phrase, to the honours of the sitting.

Sir John de Walton sat at the head of the table; his eye, though it
seemed to have no certain object, yet never for a moment remained
stationary, but glanced from one countenance to another of the ring
formed by his guests, for such they all were, no doubt, though he
himself could hardly have told upon what principle he had issued the
invitations; and even apparently was at a loss to think what, in one or
two cases, had procured him the honour of their presence.

One person in particular caught De Walton's eye, as having the air of a
redoubted man-at-arms, although it seemed as if fortune had not of late
smiled upon his enterprises. He was a tall raw-boned man, of an
extremely rugged countenance, and his skin, which showed itself through
many a loophole in his dress, exhibited a complexion which must have
endured all the varieties of an outlawed life; and akin to one who had,
according to the customary phrase, "ta'en the bent with Robin Bruce,"
in other words occupied the moors with him as an insurgent. Some such
idea certainly crossed De Walton's mind. Yet the apparent coolness, and
absence of alarm, with which the stranger sat at the board of an
English officer, at the same time being wholly in his power, had much
in it which was irreconcilable with any such suggestion. De Walton, and
several of those about him, had in the course of the day observed that
this tattered cavalier, the most remarkable parts of whose garb and
equipments consisted of an old coat-of-mail and a rusted yet massive
partisan about eight feet long, was possessed of superior skill in the
art of hunting to any individual of their numerous party. The governor
having looked at this suspicious figure until he had rendered the
stranger aware of the special interest which he attracted, at length
filled a goblet of choice wine, and requested him, as one of the best
pupils of Sir Tristem who had attended upon the day's chase, to pledge
him in a vintage superior to that supplied to the general company.

"I suppose, however, sir," said De Walton, "you will have no objections
to put off my challenge of a brimmer, until you can answer my pledge in
Gascoigne wine, which grew in the king's own demesne, was pressed for
his own lip, and is therefore fittest to be emptied to his majesty's
health and prosperity."

"One half of the island of Britain," said the woodsman, with great
composure, "will be of your honour's opinion; but as I belong to the
other half, even the choicest liquor in Gascony cannot render that
health acceptable to me."

A murmur of disapprobation ran through the warriors present; the
priests hung their heads, looked deadly grave, and muttered their
pater-nosters.

"You see, stranger," said De Walton sternly, "that your speech
discomposes the company."

"It may be so," replied the man, in the same blunt tone; "and it may
happen that there is no harm in the speech notwithstanding."

"Do you consider that it is made in my presence?" answered De Walton.

"Yes, Sir Governor."

"And have you thought what must be the necessary inference?" continued
De Walton.

"I may form a round guess," answered the stranger, "what I might have
to fear, if your safe conduct and word of honour, when inviting me to
this hunting, were less trustworthy than I know full well it really is.
But I am your guest--your meat is even now passing my throat--your cup,
filled with right good wine, I have just now quaffed off--and I would
not fear the rankest Paynim infidel, if we stood in such relation
together, much less an English knight. I tell you, besides, Sir Knight,
you undervalue the wine we have quaffed. The high flavour and contents
of your cup, grow where it will, give me spirit to tell you one or two
circumstances, which cold cautious sobriety would, in a moment like
this, have left unsaid. You wish, I doubt not, to know who I am? My
Christian name is Michael--my surname is that of Turnbull, a redoubted
clan, to whose honours, even in the field of hunting or of battle, I
have added something. My abode is beneath the mountain of Rubieslaw, by
the fair streams of Teviot. You are surprised that I know how to hunt
the wild cattle,--I, who have made them my sport from infancy in the
lonely forests of Jed and Southdean, and have killed more of them than
you or any Englishman in your host ever saw, even if you include the
doughty deeds of this day."

The bold borderer made this declaration with the same provoking degree
of coolness which predominated in his whole demeanour, and was indeed
his principal attribute. His effrontery did not fail to produce its
effect upon Sir John De Walton, who instantly called out, "To arms! to
arms!--Secure the spy and traitor! Ho! pages and yeomen--William,
Anthony, Bend-the-bow, and Greenleaf--seize the traitor, and bind him
with your bow-strings and dog-leashes--bind him, I say, until the blood
start from beneath his nails!"

"Here is a goodly summons!" said Turnbull, with a sort of horselaugh.
"Were I as sure of being answered by twenty men I could name, there
would be small doubt of the upshot of this day."

The archers thickened around the hunter, yet laid no hold on him, none
of them being willing to be the first who broke the peace proper to the
occasion.

"Tell me," said De Walton, "thou traitor, for what waitest thou here?"

"Simply and solely," said the Jed forester, "that I may deliver up to
the Douglas the castle of his ancestors, and that I may ensure thee,
Sir Englishman, the payment of thy deserts, by cutting that very throat
which thou makest such a brawling use of."

At the same time, perceiving that the yeomen were crowding behind him
to carry their lord's commands into execution so soon as they should be
reiterated, the huntsman turned himself short round upon those who
appeared about to surprise him, and having, by the suddenness of the
action, induced them to step back a pace, he proceeded--"Yes, John de
Walton, my purpose was ere now to have put thee to death, as one whom I
find in possession of that castle and territory which belong to my
master, a knight much more worthy than thyself; but I know not why I
have paused--thou hast given me food when I have hungered for
twenty-four hours, I have not therefore had the heart to pay thee at
advantage as thou hast deserved. Begone from this place and country,
and take the fair warning of a foe; thou hast constituted thyself the
mortal enemy of this people, and there are those among them who have
seldom been injured or defied with impunity. Take no care in searching
after me, it will be in vain,--until I meet thee at a time which will
come at my pleasure, not thine. Push not your inquisition into cruelty,
to discover by what means I have deceived you, for it is impossible for
you to learn; and with this friendly advice, look at me and take your
leave, for although we shall one day meet, it may be long ere I see you
again."

De Walton remained silent, hoping that his prisoner, (for he saw no
chance of his escaping,) might, in his communicative humour, drop some
more information, and was not desirous to precipitate a fray with which
the scene was likely to conclude, unconscious at the same time of the
advantage which he thereby gave the daring hunter.

As Turnbull concluded his sentence, he made a sudden spring backwards,
which carried him out of the circle formed around him, and before they
were aware of his intentions, at once disappeared among the underwood.

"Seize him--seize him!" repeated De Walton: "let us have him at least
at our discretion, unless the earth has actually swallowed him."

This indeed appeared not unlikely, for near the place where Turnbull
had made the spring, there yawned a steep ravine, into which he
plunged, and descended by the assistance of branches, bushes, and
copsewood, until he reached the bottom, where he found some road to the
outskirts of the forest, through which he made his escape, leaving the
most expert woodsmen among the pursuers totally at fault, and unable to
trace his footsteps.






This interlude carried some confusion into the proceedings of the hunt,
thus suddenly surprised by the apparition of Michael Turnbull, an armed
and avowed follower of the House of Douglas, a sight so little to be
expected in the territory where his master was held a rebel and a
bandit, and where he himself must have been well known to most of the
peasantry present. The circumstance made an obvious impression on the
English chivalry. Sir John de Walton looked grave and thoughtful,
ordered the hunters to be assembled on the spot, and directed his
soldiers to commence a strict search among the persons who had attended
the chase, so as to discover whether Turnbull had any companions among
them; but it was too late to make that enquiry in the strict fashion
which De Walton directed.

The Scottish attendants on the chase, when they beheld that the
hunting, under pretence of which they were called together, was
interrupted for the purpose of laying hands upon their persons, and
subjecting them to examination, took care to suit their answers to the
questions put to them; in a word, they kept their own secret, if they
had any. Many of them, conscious of being the weaker party, became
afraid of foul play, slipt away from the places to which they had been
appointed, and left the hunting-match like men who conceived they had
been invited with no friendly intent. Sir John de Walton became aware
of the decreasing numbers of the Scottish--their gradual disappearance
awakening in the English knight that degree of suspicion which had of
late become his peculiar characteristic.

"Take, I pray thee," said he to Sir Aymer de Valence, "as many
men-at-arms as thou canst get together in five minutes' space, and at
least a hundred of the mounted archers, and ride as fast as thou canst,
without permitting them to straggle from thy standard, to reinforce the
garrison of Douglas; for I have my own thoughts what may have been
attempted on the castle, when we observe with our own eyes such a nest
of traitors here assembled."

"With reverence, Sir John," replied Aymer, "you shoot in this matter
rather beyond the mark. That the Scottish peasants have had bad
thoughts against us, I will be the last to deny; but, long debarred
from any silvan sport, you cannot wonder at their crowding to any
diversion by wood or river, and still less at their being easily
alarmed as to the certainty of the safe footing on which they stand
with us. The least rough usage is likely to strike them with fear, and
with the desire of escape, and so"--

"And so," said Sir John de Walton, who had listened with a degree of
impatience scarce consistent with the grave and formal politeness which
one knight was accustomed to bestow upon another, "and so I would
rather see Sir Aymer de Valence busy his horse's heels to execute my
orders, than give his tongue the trouble of impugning them."

At this sharp reprimand, all present looked at each other with
indications of marked displeasure. Sir Aymer was highly offended, but
saw it was no time to indulge in reprisal. He bowed until the feather
which was in his barret-cap mingled with his horse's mane, and without
reply--for he did not even choose to trust his voice in reply at the
moment--headed a considerable body of cavalry by the straightest road
back to the Castle of Douglas.

When he came to one of those eminences from which he could observe the
massive and complicated towers and walls of the old fortress, with the
glitter of the broad lake which surrounded it on three sides, he felt
much pleasure at the sight of the great banner of England, which
streamed from the highest part of the building. "I knew it," he
internally said; "I was certain that Sir John de Walton had become a
very woman in the indulgence of his fears and suspicions. Alas! that a
situation of responsibility should so much have altered a disposition
which I have known so noble and so knightly! By this good day, I scarce
know in what manner I should demean me when thus publicly rebuked
before the garrison. Certainly he deserves that I should, at some time
or other, let him understand, that however he may triumph in the
exercise of his short-lived command, yet, when man is to meet with man,
it will puzzle Sir John de Walton to show himself the superior of Aymer
de Valence, or perhaps to establish himself as his equal. But if, on
the contrary, his fears, however fantastic, are sincere at the moment
he expresses them, it becomes me to obey punctually commands which,
however absurd, are imposed in consequence of the governor's belief
that they are rendered necessary by the times, and not inventions
designed to vex and domineer over his officers in the indulgence of his
official powers. I would I knew which is the true statement of the
case, and whether the once famed De Walton is become afraid of his
enemies more than fits a knight, or makes imaginary doubts the pretext
of tyrannizing over his friend. I cannot say it would make much
difference to me, but I would rather have it that the man I once loved
had turned a petty tyrant than a weak-spirited coward; and I would be
content that he should study to vex me, rather than be afraid of his
own shadow."

With these ideas passing in his mind, the young knight crossed the
causeway which traversed the piece of water that fed the moat, and,
passing under the strongly fortified gateway, gave strict orders for
letting down the portcullis, and elevating the drawbridge, even at the
appearance of De Walton's own standard before it.

A slow and guarded movement from the hunting-ground to the Castle of
Douglas, gave the governor ample time to recover his temper, and to
forget that his young friend had shown less alacrity than usual in
obeying his commands. He was even disposed to treat as a jest the
length of time and extreme degree of ceremony with which every point of
martial discipline was observed on his own re-admission to the castle,
though the raw air of a wet spring evening whistled around his own
unsheltered person, and those of his followers, as they waited before
the castle gate for the exchange of pass-words, the delivery of keys,
and all the slow minutiae attendant upon the movements of a garrison in
a well-guarded fortress.

"Come," said he to an old knight, who was peevishly blaming the
lieutenant-governor, "it was my own fault; I spoke but now to Aymer de
Valence with more authoritative emphasis than his newly-dubbed dignity
was pleased with, and this precise style of obedience is a piece of not
unnatural and very pardonable revenge. Well, we will owe him a return,
Sir Philip--shall we not? This is not a night to keep a man at the
gate."

This dialogue, overheard by some of the squires and pages, was bandied
about from one to another, until it entirely lost the tone of
good-humour in which it was spoken, and the offence was one for which
Sir John de Walton and old Sir Philip were to meditate revenge, and was
said to have been represented by the governor as a piece of mortal and
intentional offence on the part of his subordinate officer.

Thus an increasing feud went on from day to day between two warriors,
who, with no just cause of quarrel, had at heart every reason to esteem
and love each other. It became visible in the fortress even to those of
the lower rank, who hoped to gain some consequence by intermingling in
the species of emulation produced by the jealousy of the commanding
officers--an emulation which may take place, indeed, in the present
day, but can hardly have the same sense of wounded pride and jealous
dignity attached to it, which existed in times when the personal honour
of knighthood rendered those who possessed it jealous of every
punctilio.

So many little debates took place between the two knights, that Sir
Aymer de Valence thought himself under the necessity of writing to his
uncle and namesake, the Earl of Pembroke, stating that his officer, Sir
John de Walton, had unfortunately of late taken some degree of
prejudice against him, and that after having borne with many provoking
instances of his displeasure, he was now compelled to request that his
place of service should be changed from the Castle of Douglas, to
wherever honour could be acquired, and time might be given to put an
end to his present cause of complaint against his commanding officer.
Through the whole letter, young Sir Aymer was particularly cautious how
he expressed his sense of Sir John de Walton's jealousy or severe
usage: but such sentiments are not easily concealed, and in spite of
him an air of displeasure glanced out from several passages, and
indicated his discontent with his uncle's old friend and companion in
arms, and with the sphere of military duty which his uncle had himself
assigned him. An accidental movement among the English troops brought
Sir Aymer an answer to his letter sooner than he could have hoped for
at that time of day, in the ordinary course of correspondence, which
was then extremely slow and interrupted.

Pembroke, a rigid old warrior, entertained the most partial opinion of
Sir John de Walton, who was a work as it were of his own hands, and was
indignant to find that his nephew, whom he considered as a mere boy,
elated by having had the dignity of knighthood conferred upon him at an
age unusually early, did not absolutely coincide with him in this
opinion. He replied to him, accordingly, in a tone of high displeasure,
and expressed himself as a person of rank would write to a young and
dependent kinsman upon the duties of his profession; and, as he
gathered his nephew's cause of complaint from his own letter, he
conceived that he did him no injustice in making it slighter than it
really was. He reminded the young man that the study of chivalry
consisted in the faithful and patient discharge of military service,
whether of high or low degree, according to the circumstances in which
war placed the champion. That above all, the post of danger, which
Douglas Castle had been termed by common consent, was also the post of
honour; and that a young man should be cautious how he incurred the
supposition of being desirous of quitting his present honourable
command, because he was tired of the discipline of a military director
so renowned as Sir John de Walton. Much also there was, as was natural
in a letter of that time, concerning the duty of young men, whether in
council or in arms, to be guided implicitly by their elders; and it was
observed, with justice, that the commanding officer, who had put
himself into the situation of being responsible with his honour, if not
his life, for the event of the siege or blockade, might, justly, and in
a degree more than common, claim the implicit direction of the whole
defence. Lastly, Pembroke reminded his nephew that he was, in a great
measure, dependent upon the report of Sir John de Walton for the
character which he was to sustain in after life; and reminded him, that
a few actions of headlong and inconsiderate valour would not so firmly
found his military reputation, as months and years spent in regular,
humble, and steady obedience to the commands which the governor of
Douglas Castle might think necessary in so dangerous a conjuncture.

This missive arrived within so short a time after the despatch of the
letter to which it was a reply, that Sir Aymer was almost tempted to
suppose that his uncle had some mode of corresponding with De Walton,
unknown to the young knight himself, and to the rest of the garrison.
And as the earl alluded to some particular displeasure which had been
exhibited by De Valence on a late trivial occasion, his uncle's
knowledge of this, and other minutiae, seemed to confirm his idea that
his own conduct was watched in a manner which he did not feel
honourable to himself, or dignified on the part of his relative; in a
word, he conceived himself exposed to that sort of surveillance of
which, in all ages, the young have accused the old. It hardly needs to
say that the admonition of the Earl of Pembroke greatly chafed the
fiery spirit of his nephew; insomuch, that if the earl had wished to
write a letter purposely to increase the prejudices which he desired to
put an end to, he could not have made use of terms better calculated
for that effect.

The truth was, that the old archer, Gilbert Greenleaf, had, without the
knowledge of the young knight, gone to Pembroke's camp, in Ayrshire,
and was recommended by Sir John de Walton to the earl, as a person who
could give such minute information respecting Aymer de Valence, as he
might desire to receive. The old archer was, as we have seen, a
formalist, and when pressed on some points of Sir Aymer de Valence's
discipline, he did not hesitate to throw out hints, which, connected
with those in the knight's letter to his uncle, made the severe old
earl adopt too implicitly the idea that his nephew was indulging a
spirit of insubordination, and a sense of impatience under authority,
most dangerous to the character of a young soldier. A little
explanation might have produced a complete agreement in the sentiments
of both; but for this, fate allowed neither time nor opportunity; and
the old earl was unfortunately induced to become a party, instead of a
negotiator, in the quarrel,

    "And by decision more embroil'd the fray."

Sir John de Walton soon perceived, that the receipt of Pembroke's
letter did not in any respect alter the cold ceremonious conduct of his
lieutenant towards him, which limited their intercourse to what their
situation rendered indispensable, and exhibited no advances to any more
frank or intimate connexion. Thus, as may sometimes be the case between
officers in their relative situations even at the present day, they
remained in that cold stiff degree of official communication, in which
their intercourse was limited to as few expressions as the respective
duties of their situation absolutely demanded. Such a state of
misunderstanding is, in fact, worse than a downright quarrel;--the
latter may be explained or apologized for, or become the subject of
mediation; but in such a case as the former, an _eclaircissement_ is as
unlikely to take place as a general engagement between two armies which
have taken up strong defensive positions on both sides. Duty, however,
obliged the two principal persons in the garrison of Douglas Castle to
be often together, when they were so far from seeking an opportunity of
making up matters, that they usually revived ancient subjects of debate.

It was upon such an occasion that De Walton, in a very formal manner,
asked De Valence in what capacity, and for how long time, it was his
pleasure that the minstrel, called Bertram, should remain at the castle.

"A week," said the governor, "is certainly long enough, in this time
and place, to express the hospitality due to a minstrel."

"Certainly," replied the young man, "I have not interest enough in the
subject to form a single wish upon it."

"In that case," resumed De Walton, "I shall request of this person to
cut short his visit at the Castle of Douglas."

"I know no particular interest," replied Aymer de Valence, "which I can
possibly have in this man's motions. He is here under pretence of
making some researches after the writings of Thomas of Erceldoun,
called the Rhymer, which he says are infinitely curious, and of which
there is a volume in the old Baron's study, saved somehow from the
flames at the last conflagration. This told, you know as much of his
errand as I do; and if you hold the presence of a wandering old man,
and the neighbourhood of a boy, dangerous to the castle under your
charge, you will no doubt do well to dismiss them--it will cost but a
word of your mouth."

"Pardon me," said De Walton; "the minstrel came here as one of your
retinue, and I could not, in fitting courtesy, send him away without
your leave."

"I am sorry, then," answered Sir Aymer, "in my turn, that you did not
mention your purpose sooner. I never entertained a dependent, vassal or
servant, whose residence in the castle I would wish to have prolonged a
moment beyond your honourable pleasure."

"I am sorry," said Sir John de Walton, "that we two have of late grown
so extremely courteous that it is difficult for us to understand each
other. This minstrel and his son come from we know not where, and are
bound we know not whither. There is a report among some of your escort,
that this fellow Bertram upon the way had the audacity to impugn, even
to your face, the King of England's right to the crown of Scotland, and
that he debated the point with you, while your other attendants were
desired by you to keep behind and out of hearing."

"Hah!" said Sir Aymer, "do you mean to found on that circumstance any
charge against my loyalty? I pray you to observe, that such an averment
would touch mine honour, which I am ready and willing to defend to the
last gasp."

"No doubt of it, Sir Knight," answered the governor; "but it is the
strolling minstrel, and not the high-born English knight, against whom
the charge is brought. Well! the minstrel comes to this castle, and he
intimates a wish that his son should be allowed to take up his quarters
at the little old convent of Saint Bride, where two or three Scottish
nuns and friars are still permitted to reside, most of them rather out
of respect to their order, than for any good will which they are
supposed to bear the English or their sovereign. It may also be noticed
that his leave was purchased by a larger sum of money, if my
information be correct, than is usually to be found in the purses of
travelling minstrels, a class of wanderers alike remarkable for their
poverty and for their genius. What do you think of all this?"

"I?"--replied De Valence; "I am happy that my situation, as a soldier,
under command, altogether dispenses with my thinking of it at all. My
post, as lieutenant of your castle, is such, that if I can manage
matters so as to call my honour and my soul my own, I must think that
quite enough of free-will is left at my command; and I promise you
shall not have again to reprove, or send a bad report of me to my
uncle, on that account."

"This is beyond sufferance!" said Sir John de Walton half aside, and
then proceeded aloud--"Do not, for Heaven's sake, do yourself and me
the injustice of supposing that I am endeavouring to gain an advantage
over you by these questions. Recollect, young knight, that when you
evade giving your commanding officer your advice when required, you
fail as much in point of duty, as if you declined affording him the
assistance of your sword and lance."

"Such being the case," answered De Valence, "let me know plainly on
what matter it is that you require my opinion? I will deliver it
plainly, and stand by the result, even if I should have the misfortune
(a crime unpardonable in so young a man, and so inferior an officer) to
differ from that of Sir John de Walton."

"I would ask you then. Sir Knight of Valence," answered the governor,
"what is your opinion with respect to this minstrel, Bertram, and
whether the suspicions respecting him and his son are not such as to
call upon me, in performance of my duty, to put them to a close
examination, with the question ordinary and extraordinary, as is usual
in such cases, and to expel them not only from the castle, but from the
whole territory of Douglas Dale, under pain of scourging, if they be
again found wandering in these parts?"

"You ask me my opinion," said De Valence, "and you shall have it, Sir
Knight of Walton, and freely and fairly, as if matters stood betwixt us
on a footing as friendly as they ever did. I agree with you, that most
of those who in this day profess the science of minstrelsy, are
altogether unqualified to support the higher pretensions of that noble
order. Minstrels by right, are men who have dedicated themselves to the
noble occupation of celebrating knightly deeds and generous principles;
it is in their verse that the valiant knight is handed down to fame,
and the poet has a right, nay is bound, to emulate the virtues which he
praises. The looseness of the times has diminished the consequence, and
impaired the morality of this class of wanderers; their satire and
their praise are now too often distributed on no other principle than
love of gain; yet let us hope that there are still among them some who
know, and also willingly perform, their duty. My own opinion is that
this Bertram holds himself as one who has not shared in the degradation
of his brethren, nor bent the knee to the mammon of the times; it must
remain with you, sir, to judge whether such a person, honourably and
morally disposed, can cause any danger to the Castle of Douglas. But
believing, from the sentiments he has manifested to me, that he is
incapable of playing the part of a traitor, I must strongly remonstrate
against his being punished as one, or subjected to the torture within
the walls of an English garrison. I should blush for my country, if it
required of us to inflict such wanton misery upon wanderers, whose sole
fault is poverty; and your own knightly sentiments will suggest more
than would become me to state to Sir John de Walton, unless in so far
as is necessary to apologize for retaining my own opinion."

Sir John de Walton's dark brow was stricken with red when he heard an
opinion delivered in opposition to his own, which plainly went to
stigmatize his advice as ungenerous, unfeeling, and unknightly. He made
an effort to preserve his temper while he thus replied with a degree of
calmness. "You have given your opinion, Sir Aymer de Valence; and that
you have given it openly and boldly, without regard to my own, I thank
you. It is not quite so clear that I am obliged to defer my own
sentiments to yours, in case the rules on which I hold my office--the
commands of the king--and the observations which I may personally have
made, shall recommend to me a different line of conduct from that which
you think it right to suggest."

De Walton bowed, in conclusion, with great gravity; and the young
knight returning the reverence with exactly the same degree of stiff
formality, asked whether there were any particular orders respecting
his duty in the castle; and having received an answer in the negative
took his departure.

Sir John de Walton, after an expression of impatience, as if
disappointed at finding that the advance which he had made towards an
explanation with his young friend had proved unexpectedly abortive,
composed his brow as if to deep thought, and walked several times to
and fro in the apartment, considering what course he was to take in
these circumstances. "It is hard to censure him severely," he said,
"when I recollect that, on first entering upon life, my own thoughts
and feelings would have been the same with those of this giddy and
hot-headed, but generous boy. Now prudence teaches me to suspect
mankind in a thousand instances where perhaps there is not sufficient
ground. If I am disposed to venture my own honour and fortune, rather
than an idle travelling minstrel should suffer a little pain, which at
all events I might make up to him by money, still, have I a right to
run the risk of a conspiracy against the king, and thus advance the
treasonable surrender of the Castle of Douglas, for which I know so
many schemes are formed; for which, too, none can be imagined so
desperate but agents will be found bold enough to undertake the
execution? A man who holds my situation, although the slave of
conscience, ought to learn to set aside those false scruples which
assume the appearance of flowing from our own moral feeling, whereas
they are in fact instilled by the suggestion of affected delicacy. I
will not, I swear by Heaven, be infected by the follies of a boy, such
as Aymer; I will not, that I may defer to his caprices, lose all that
love, honour, and ambition can propose, for the reward of twelve
months' service, of a nature the most watchful and unpleasant. I--will
go straight to my point, and use the ordinary precautions in Scotland
which I should employ in Normandy or Gascoigny.--What ho! page! who
waits there?"

One of his attendants replied to his summons--"Seek me out Gilbert
Greenleaf the archer, and tell him I would speak with him touching the
two bows and the sheaf of arrows, concerning which I gave him a
commission to Ayr."

A few minutes intervened after the order was given, when the archer
entered, holding in his hand two bow-staves, not yet fashioned, and a
number of arrows secured together with a thong. He bore the mysterious
looks of one whose apparent business is not of very great consequence,
but is meant as a passport for other affairs which are in themselves of
a secret nature. Accordingly, as the knight was silent, and afforded no
other opening for Greenleaf, that judicious negotiator proceeded to
enter upon such as was open to him.

"Here are the bow-staves, noble sir, which you desired me to obtain
while I was at Ayr with the Earl of Pembroke's army. They are not so
good as I could have wished, yet are perhaps of better quality than
could have been procured by any other than a fair judge of the weapon.
The Earl of Pembroke's whole camp are frantic mad in order to procure
real Spanish staves from the Groyne, and other ports in Spain; but
though two vessels laden with such came into the port of Ayr, said to
be for the King's army, yet I believe never one half of them have come
into English hands. These two grew in Sherwood, which having been
seasoned since the time of Robin Hood, are not likely to fail either in
strength or in aim, in so strong a hand, and with so just an eye, as
those of the men who wait on your worship."

"And who has got the rest, since two ships' cargoes of new bow-staves
are arrived at Ayr, and thou with difficulty hast only procured me two
old ones?" said the governor.

"Faith, I pretend not skill enough to know," answered Greenleaf,
shrugging his shoulders. "Talk there is of plots in that country as
well as here. It is said that their Bruce, and the rest of his kinsmen,
intend a new May-game, and that the outlawed king proposes to land near
Turnberry, early in summer, with a number of stout kernes from Ireland;
and no doubt the men of his mock earldom of Garrick are getting them
ready with bow and spear for so hopeful an undertaking. I reckon that
it will not cost us the expense of more than a few score of sheaves of
arrows to put all that matter to rights."

"Do you talk then of conspiracies in this part of the country,
Greenleaf?" said De Walton. "I know you are a sagacious fellow, well
bred for many a day to the use of the bent stick and string, and will
not allow such a practice to go on under thy nose, without taking
notice of it."

"I am old enough, Heaven knows," said Greenleaf, "and have had good
experience of these Scottish wars, and know well whether these native
Scots are a people to be trusted to by knight or yeoman. Say they are a
false generation, and say a good archer told you so, who, with a fair
aim, seldom missed a handsbreadth of the white. Ah! sir, your honour
knows how to deal with them---ride them strongly, and rein them
hard,--you are not like those simple novices who imagine that all is to
be done by gentleness, and wish to parade themselves as courteous and
generous to those faithless mountaineers, who never, in the course of
their lives, knew any tincture either of courteousness or generosity."

"Thou alludest to some one," said the governor, "and I charge thee,
Gilbert, to be plain and sincere with me. Thou knowest, methinks, that
in trusting me thou wilt come to no harm?"

"It is true, it is true, sir," said the old remnant of the wars,
carrying his hand to his brow, "but it were imprudent to communicate
all the remarks which float through an old man's brain in the idle
moments of such a garrison as this. One stumbles unawares on fantasies,
as well as realities, and thus one gets, not altogether undeservedly,
the character of a tale-bearer and mischief-maker among his comrades,
and methinks I would not willingly fall under that accusation."

"Speak frankly to me," answered De Walton, "and have no fear of being
misconstrued, whosoever the conversation may concern."

"Nay, in plain truth," answered Gilbert, "I fear not the greatness of
this young knight, being, as I am, the oldest soldier in the garrison,
and having drawn a bow-string long and many a day ere he was weaned
from his nurse's breast."

"It is, then." said De Walton, "my lieutenant and friend, Aymer de
Valence, at whom your suspicions point?"

"At nothing," replied the archer, "touching the honour of the young
knight himself, who is as brave as the sword he wears, and, his youth
considered, stands high in the roll of English chivalry; but he is
young, as your worship knows, and I own that in the choice of his
company he disturbs and alarms me."

"Why, you know, Greenleaf," answered the governor, "that in the leisure
of a garrison a knight cannot always confine his sports and pleasures
among those of his own rank, who are not numerous, and may not be so
gamesome or fond of frolic, as he would desire them to be."

"I know that well," answered the archer, "nor would I say a word
concerning your honour's lieutenant for joining any honest fellows,
however inferior their rank, in the wrestling ring, or at a bout of
quarterstaff. But if Sir Aymer de Valence has a fondness for martial
tales of former days, methinks he had better learn them from the
ancient soldiers who have followed Edward the First, whom God
assoilzie, and who have known before his time the Barons' wars and
Other onslaughts, in which the knights and archers of merry England
transmitted so many gallant actions to be recorded by fame; this truly,
I say, were more beseeming the Earl of Pembroke's nephew, than to see
him closet himself day after day with a strolling minstrel, who gains
his livelihood by reciting nonsense and lies to such young men as are
fond enough to believe him, of whom hardly any one knows whether he be
English or Scottish in his opinions, and still less can any one pretend
to say whether he is of English or Scottish birth, or with what purpose
he lies lounging about this castle, and is left free to communicate
every thing which passes within it to those old mutterers of matins at
St. Bride's, who say with their tongues God save King Edward, but pray
in their hearts God save King Robert the Bruce. Such a communication he
can easily carry on by means of his son, who lies at Saint Bride's
cell, as your worship knows, under pretence of illness."

"How do you say?" exclaimed the governor, "under pretence?--is he not
then really indisposed?"

"Nay, he may be sick to the death for aught I know," said the archer;
"but if so, were it not then more natural that the father should attend
his son's sick-bed, than that he should be ranging about this castle,
where one eternally meets him in the old Baron's study, or in some
corner, where you least expect to find him?"

"If he has no lawful object," replied the knight, "it might be as you
say; but he is said to be in quest of ancient poems or prophecies of
Merlin, of the Rhymer, or some other old bard; and in truth it is
natural for him to wish to enlarge his stock of knowledge and power of
giving amusement, and where should he find the means save in a study
filled with ancient books?"

"No doubt," replied the Archer, with a sort of dry civil sneer of
incredulity; "I have seldom known an insurrection in Scotland but that
it was prophesied by some old forgotten rhyme, conjured out of dust and
cobwebs, for the sake of giving courage to these North Country rebels,
who durst not otherwise have abidden the whistling of the grey-goose
shaft; but curled heads are hasty, and, with license, even your own
train, Sir Knight, retains too much of the fire of youth for such
uncertain times as the present."

"Thou hast convinced me, Gilbert Greenleaf, and I will look into this
man's business and occupation more closely than hitherto. This is no
time to peril the safety of a royal castle for the sake of affecting
generosity towards a man of whom we know so little, and to whom, till
we receive a very full explanation, we may, without doing him
injustice, attach grave suspicions. Is he now in the apartment called
the Baron's study?"

"Your worship will be certain to find him there," replied Greenleaf.

"Then follow me, with two or three of thy comrades, and keep out of
sight, but within hearing; it may be necessary to arrest this man."

"My assistance," said the old archer, "shall be at hand when you call,
but"--

"But what?" said the knight; "I hope I am not to find doubts and
disobedience on all hands?"

"Certainly not on mine," replied Greenleaf; "I would only remind your
worship that what I have said was a sincere opinion expressed in answer
to your worship's question; and that, as Sir Aymer de Valence has
avowed himself the patron of this man, I would not willingly be left to
the hazard of his revenge."

"Pshaw" answered De Walton, "is Aymer de Valence governor of this
castle, or am I? or to whom do you imagine you are responsible for
answering such questions as I may put to you?"

"Nay," replied the archer, secretly not displeased at seeing De Walton
show some little jealousy of his own authority, "believe me, Sir
Knight, that I know my own station and your worship's, and that I am
not now to be told to whom I owe obedience."

"To the study, then, and let us find the man," said the governor.

"A fine matter, indeed," subjoined Greenleaf, following him, "that your
worship should have to go in person to look after the arrest of so mean
an individual. But your honour is right; these minstrels are often
jugglers, and possess the power of making their escape by means which
borrel [Footnote: Unlearned.] folk like myself are disposed to
attribute to necromancy."

Without attending to these last words, Sir John de Walton set forth
towards the study, walking at a quick pace, as if this conversation had
augmented his desire to find himself in possession of the person of the
suspected minstrel.

Traversing the ancient passages of the castle, the governor had no
difficulty in reaching the study, which was strongly vaulted with
stone, and furnished with a sort of iron cabinet, intended for the
preservation of articles and papers of value, in case of fire. Here he
found the minstrel seated at a small table, sustaining before him a
manuscript, apparently of great antiquity, from which he seemed engaged
in making extracts. The windows of the room were very small, and still
showed some traces that they had originally been glazed with a painted
history of Saint Bride--another mark of the devotion of the great
family of Douglas to their tutelar saint.

The minstrel, who had seemed deeply wrapped in the contemplation of his
task, on being disturbed by the unlooked-for entrance of Sir John de
Walton, rose with every mark of respect and humility, and, remaining
standing in the governor's presence, appeared to wait for his
interrogations, as if he had anticipated that the visit concerned
himself particularly.

"I am to suppose, Sir Minstrel," said Sir John de Walton, "that you
have been successful in your search, and have found the roll of poetry
or prophecies that you proposed to seek after amongst these broken
shelves and tattered volumes?"

"More successful than I could have expected," replied the minstrel,
"considering the effects of the conflagration. This, Sir Knight, is
apparently the fatal volume for which I sought, and strange it is,
considering the heavy chance of other books contained in this library,
that I have been able to find a few though imperfect fragments of it."

"Since, therefore, you have been permitted to indulge your curiosity,"
said the governor, "I trust, minstrel, you will have no objection to
satisfy mine?"

The minstrel replied with the same humility, "that if there was any
thing within the poor compass of his skill which could gratify Sir John
de Walton in any degree, he would but reach his lute, and presently
obey his commands."

"You mistake, Sir," said Sir John, somewhat harshly. "I am none of
those who have hours to spend in listening to tales or music of former
days; my life has hardly given me time enough for learning the duties
of my profession, far less has it allowed me leisure for such twangling
follies. I care not who knows it, but my ear is so incapable judging of
your art, which you doubtless think a noble one, that I can scarcely
tell the modulation of one tune from another."

"In that case," replied the minstrel composedly, "I can hardly promise
myself the pleasure of affording your worship the amusement which I
might otherwise have done."

"Nor do I look for any from your hand," said the governor, advancing a
step nearer to him, and speaking in a sterner tone. "I want
information, sir, which I am assured you can give me, if you incline;
and it is my duty to tell you, that if you show unwillingness to speak
the truth, I know means by which it will become my painful duty to
extort it in a more disagreeable manner than I would wish."

"If your questions, Sir Knight," answered Bertram, "be such as I can or
ought to answer, there shall be no occasion to put them more than once.
If they are such as I cannot, or ought not to reply to, believe me that
no threats of violence will extort an answer from me."

"You speak boldly," said Sir John de Walton; "but take my word for it,
that your courage will be put to the test. I am as little fond of
proceeding to such extremities as you can be of undergoing them, but
such will be the natural consequence of your own obstinacy. I therefore
ask you, whether Bertram be your real name--whether you have any other
profession than that of a travelling minstrel--and, lastly, whether you
have any acquaintance or connexion with any Englishman or Scottishman
beyond the walls of this Castle of Douglas?"

"To these questions," replied the minstrel, "I have already answered
the worshipful knight, Sir Aymer de Valence, and having fully satisfied
him, it is not, I conceive, necessary that I should undergo a second
examination; nor is it consistent either with your worship's honour, or
that of the lieutenant-governor, that such a re-examination should take
place."

"You are very considerate," replied the governor, "of my honour and of
that of Sir Aymer de Valence. Take my word for it, they are both in
perfect safety in our own keeping, and may dispense with your
attention. I ask you, will you answer the enquiries which it is my duty
to make, or am I to enforce obedience by putting you under the
penalties of the question? I have already, it is my duty to say, seen
the answers you have returned to my lieutenant, and they do not satisfy
me."

He at the same time clapped his hands, and two or three archers showed
themselves stripped of their tunics, and only attired in their shirts
and hose.

"I understand," said the minstrel, "that you intend to inflict upon me
a punishment which is foreign to the genius of the English laws, in
that no proof is adduced of my guilt. I have already told that I am by
birth an Englishman, by profession a minstrel, and that I am totally
unconnected with any person likely to nourish any design against this
Castle of Douglas, Sir John de Walton, or his garrison. What answers
you may extort from me by bodily agony, I cannot, to speak as a
plain-dealing Christian, hold myself responsible for. I think that I
can endure as much pain as any one; I am sure that I never yet felt a
degree of agony, that I would not willingly prefer to breaking my
plighted word, or becoming a false informer against innocent persons:
but I own I do not know the extent to which the art of torture may be
carried; and though I do not fear you, Sir John de Walton, yet I must
acknowledge that I fear myself, since I know not to what extremity your
cruelty may be capable of subjecting me, or how far I may be enabled to
bear it. I, therefore, in the first place, protest, that I shall in no
manner be liable for any words which I may utter in the course of any
examination enforced from me by torture; and you must therefore, under
such circumstances, proceed to the execution of an office, which,
permit me to say, is hardly that which I expected to have found thus
administered by an accomplished knight like yourself."

"Hark you, sir," replied the governor, "you and I are at issue, and in
doing my duty, I ought instantly to proceed to the extremities I have
threatened; but perhaps you yourself feel less reluctance to undergo
the examination as proposed, than I shall do in commanding it; I will
therefore consign you for the present to a place of confinement,
suitable to one who is suspected of being a spy upon this fortress.
Until you are pleased to remove such suspicions, your lodgings and
nourishment are those of a prisoner. In the meantime, before subjecting
you to the question, take notice, I will myself ride to the Abbey of
Saint Bride, and satisfy myself whether the young person whom you would
pass as your son, is possessed of the same determination as that which
you yourself seem to assert. It may so happen that his examination and
yours may throw such light upon each other as will decidedly prove
either your guilt or innocence, without its being confirmed by the use
of the extraordinary question. If it be otherwise, tremble for your
son's sake, if not for your own.--Have I shaken you, sir?--or do you
fear, for your boy's young sinews and joints, the engines which, in
your case, you seem willing to defy?"

"Sir," answered the minstrel, recovering from the momentary emotion he
had shown, "I leave it to yourself, as a man of honour and candour,
whether you ought, in common fairness, to form a worse opinion of any
man, because he is not unwilling to incur, in his own person,
severities which he would not desire to be inflicted upon his child, a
sickly youth, just recovering from a dangerous disease."

"It is my duty," answered De Walton, after a short pause, "to leave no
stone unturned by which this business may be traced to the source; and
if thou desirest mercy for thy son, thou wilt thyself most easily
attain it, by setting him the example of honesty and plain-dealing."

The minstrel threw himself back on the seat, as if fully resolved to
bear every extremity that could be inflicted, rather than make any
farther answer than he had already offered. Sir John de Walton himself
seemed in some degree uncertain what might now be his best course. He
felt an invincible repugnance to proceed, without due consideration, in
what most people would have deemed the direct line of his duty, by
inflicting the torture both upon father and son; but deep as was his
sense of devotion towards the King, and numerous as were the hopes and
expectations he had formed upon the strict discharge of his present
high trust, he could not resolve upon having recourse at once to this
cruel method of cutting the knot. Bertram's appearance was venerable,
and his power of words not unworthy of his aspect and bearing. The
governor remembered that Aymer de Valence, whose judgment in general it
was impossible to deny, had described him as one of those rare
individuals, who vindicated the honour of a corrupted profession by
their personal good behaviour; and he acknowledged to himself, that
there was gross cruelty and injustice in refusing to admit the prisoner
to the credit of being a true and honest man, until, by way of proving
his rectitude, he had strained every sinew, and crushed every joint in
his body, as well as those of his son. "I have no touchstone," he said
internally, "which can distinguish truth from falsehood; the Bruce and
his followers are on the alert,-he has certainly equipped the galleys
which lay at Rachrin during winter. This story, too, of Greenleaf,
about arms being procured for a new insurrection, tallies strangely
with the appearance of that savage-looking forester at the hunt; and
all tends to show, that something is upon the anvil which it is my duty
to provide against. I will, therefore, pass over no circumstance by
which I can affect the mind through hope or fear; but, please God to
give me light from any other source, I will not think it lawful to
torment these unfortunate, and, it may yet be, honest men." He
accordingly took his departure from the library, whispering a word to
Greenleaf respecting the prisoner.

He had reached the outward door of the study, and his satellites had
already taken the minstrel into their grasp, when the voice of the old
man was heard calling upon De Walton to return for a single moment.

"What hast thou to say, sir?" said the governor; "be speedy, for I have
already lost more time in listening to thee than I am answerable for;
and so I advise thee for thine own sake"--

"I advise thee," said the minstrel, "for thine own sake, Sir John de
Walton, to beware how thou dost insist on thy present purpose, by which
thou thyself alone, of all men living,--will most severely suffer. If
thou harmest a hair of that young man's head--nay, if thou permittest
him to undergo any privation which it is in thy power to prevent, thou
wilt, in doing so, prepare for thine own suffering a degree of agony
more acute than anything else in this mortal world could cause thee. I
swear by the most blessed objects of our holy religion; I call to
witness that holy sepulchre, of which I have been an unworthy visitor,
that I speak nothing but the truth, and that thou wilt one day testify
thy gratitude for the part I am now acting. It is my interest, as well
as yours, to secure you in the safe possession of this castle, although
assuredly I know some things respecting it, and respecting your
worship, which I am not at liberty to tell without the consent of that
youth. Bring me but a note under his hand, consenting to my taking you
into our mystery, and believe me, you will soon see those clouds
charmed away; since there was never a doleful uncertainty which more
speedily changed to joy, or a thunder-cloud of adversity which more
instantly gave way to sunshine, than would then the suspicions which
appear now so formidable."

He spoke with so much earnestness as to make some impression upon Sir
John de Walton, who was once more wholly at a loss to know what line
his duty called upon him to pursue.

"I would most gladly," said the governor, "follow out my purpose by the
gentlest means in my power; and I shall bring no further distress upon
this poor lad, than thine own obstinacy and his shall appear to
deserve. In the meantime, think, Sir Minstrel, that my duty has limits,
and if I slack it for a day, it will become thee to exert every effort
in thy power to meet my condescension. I will give thee leave to
address thy son by a line under thy hand, and I will await his answer
before I proceed farther in this matter, which seems to be very
mysterious. Meantime, as thou hast a soul to be saved, I conjure thee
to speak the truth, and tell me whether the secrets of which thou
seemest to be a too faithful treasurer, have regard to the practices of
Douglas, of Bruce, or of any in their names, against this Castle of
Douglas?"

The prisoner thought a moment, and then replied--"I am aware, Sir
Knight, of the severe charge under which this command is intrusted to
your hands, and were it in my power to assist you, as a faithful
minstrel and loyal subject, either with hand or tongue, I should feel
myself called upon so to do; but so far am I from being the character
your suspicions have apprehended, that I should have held it for
certain that the Bruce and Douglas had assembled their followers, for
the purpose of renouncing their rebellious attempts, and taking their
departure for the Holy Land, but for the apparition of the forester,
who, I hear, bearded you at the hunting, which impresses upon me the
belief, that when so resolute a follower and henchman of the Douglas
was sitting fearless among you, his master and comrades could be at no
great distance--how far his intentions could be friendly to you, I must
leave it to yourself to judge; only believe me thus far, that the rack,
pulley, or pincers, would not have compelled me to act the informer, or
adviser, in a quarrel wherein I have little or no share, if I had not
been desirous of fixing the belief upon you, that you are dealing with
a true man, and one who has your welfare at heart.--Meanwhile, permit
me to have writing materials, or let my own be restored, for I possess,
in some degree, the higher arts of my calling; nor do I fear but that I
can procure for you an explanation of these marvels, without much more
loss of time."

"God grant it prove so," said the governor; "though I see not well how
I can hope for so favourable a termination, and I may sustain great
harm by trusting too much on the present occasion. My duty, however,
requires that, in the meantime, you be removed into strict confinement."

He handed to the prisoner, as he spoke, the writing materials, which
had been seized upon by the archers on their first entrance, and then
commanded those satellites to unhand the minstrel.

"I must, then," said Bertram, "remain subjected to all the severities
of a strict captivity; but I deprecate no hardship whatever in my own
person, so I may secure you from acting with a degree of rashness, of
which you will all your life repent, without the means of atoning."

"No more words, minstrel," said the governor; "but since I have made my
choice, perhaps a very dangerous one for myself, let us carry this
spell into execution, which thou sayest is to serve me, as mariners say
that oil spread upon the raging billows will assuage their fury."





     Beware! beware! of the black Friar,
     He still retains his sway,
     For he is yet the Church's heir by right,
     Whoever may be the lay.
     Amundeville is lord by day,
     But the monk is lord by night,
     Nor wine nor wassel could raise a vassal
     To question that friar's right.
                         Don Juan, CANTO XVII.


The minstrel made no vain boast of the skill which he possessed in the
use of pen and ink. In fact, no priest of the time could have produced
his little scroll more speedily, more neatly composed, or more fairly
written, than were the lines addressed "To the youth called Augustine,
son of Bertram the Minstrel."

"I have not folded this letter," said he, "nor tied it with silk, for
it is not expressed so as to explain the mystery to you; nor, to speak
frankly, do I think that it can convey to you any intelligence; but it
may be satisfactory to show you what the letter does not contain, and
that it is written from and to a person, who both mean kindly towards
you and your garrison."

"That," said the governor, "is a deception which is easily practised;
it tends, however, to show, though not with certainty, that you are
disposed to act upon good faith; and until the contrary appear, I shall
consider it a point of duty to treat you with as much gentleness as the
matter admits of. Meantime, I will myself ride to the Abbey of Saint
Bride, and in person examine the young prisoner; and as you say he has
the power, so I pray to Heaven he may have the will, to read this
riddle, which seems to throw us all into confusion." So saying, he
ordered his horse, and while it was getting ready, he perused with
great composure the minstrel's letter. Its contents ran thus:--

"DEAR AUGUSTINE,

"Sir John de Walton, the governor of this castle, has conceived those
suspicions which I pointed out as likely to be the consequence of our
coming to this country without an avowed errand. I at least am seized,
and threatened with examination under torture, to force me to tell the
purpose of our journey; but they shall tear the flesh from my bones,
ere they force me to break the oath which I have taken. And the purport
of this letter is to apprize you of the danger in which you stand of
being placed in similar circumstances, unless you are disposed to
authorize me to make the discovery to this knight; but on this subject
you are only to express your own wishes, being assured they shall be in
every respect attended to by your devoted

"BERTRAM."

This letter did not throw the smallest light upon the mystery of the
writer. The governor read it more than once, and turned it repeatedly
in his hand, as if he had hoped by that mechanical process to draw
something from the missive, which at a first view the words did not
express; but as no result of this sort appeared, De Walton retired to
the hall, where he informed Sir Aymer de Valence, that he was going
abroad as far as the Abbey of Saint Bride, and that he would be obliged
by his taking upon him the duties of governor during his absence. Sir
Aymer, of course, intimated his acquiescence in the charge; and the
state of disunion in which they stood to each other, permitted no
further explanation.

Upon the arrival of Sir John de Walton at the dilapidated shrine, the
abbot, with trembling haste, made it his business immediately to attend
the commander of the English garrison, upon whom for the present, their
house depended for every indulgence they experienced, as well as for
the subsistence and protection necessary to them in so perilous a
period. Having interrogated this old man respecting the youth residing
in the Abbey, De Walton was informed that he had been indisposed since
left there by his father, Bertram, a minstrel. It appeared to the
abbot, that his indisposition might be of that contagious kind which,
at that period, ravaged the English Borders, and made some incursions
into Scotland, where it afterwards worked a fearful progress. After
some farther conversation, Sir John de Walton put into the abbot's hand
the letter to the young person under his roof, on delivering which to
Augustine, the reverend father was charged with a message to the
English governor, so bold, that he was afraid to be the bearer of it.
It signified, that the youth could not, and would not, at that moment,
receive the English knight; but that, if he came back on the morrow
after mass, it was probable he might learn something of what was
requested.

"This is not an answer," said Sir John de Walton, "to be sent by a boy
like this to a person in my charge; and me thinks, Father Abbot, you
consult your own safety but slenderly in delivering such an insolent
message."

The abbot trembled under the folds of his large coarse habit; and De
Walton, imagining that his discomposure was the consequence of guilty
fear, called upon him to remember the duties which he owed to England,
the benefits which he had received from himself, and the probable
consequence of taking part in a pert boy's insolent defiance of the
power of the governor of the province.

The abbot vindicated himself from these charges with the utmost
anxiety. He pledged his sacred word, that the inconsiderate character
of the boy's message was owing to the waywardness arising from
indisposition. He reminded the governor that, as a Christian and an
Englishman, he had duties to observe towards the community of Saint
Bride, which had never given the English government the least subject
of complaint. As he spoke, the churchman seemed to gather courage from
the immunities of his order. He said he could not permit a sick boy who
had taken refuge within the sanctuary of the Church, to be seized or
subjected to any species of force, unless he was accused of a specific
crime, capable of being immediately proved. The Douglasses, a
headstrong race, had, in former days, uniformly respected the sanctuary
of Saint Bride, and it was not to be supposed that the king of England,
the dutiful and obedient child of the Church of Rome, would act with
less veneration for her rights, than the followers of a usurper,
homicide, and excommunicated person like Robert Bruce.

Walton was considerably shaken with this remonstrance. He knew that, in
the circumstances of the times, the Pope had great power in every
controversy in which it was his pleasure to interfere. He knew that
even in the dispute respecting the supremacy of Scotland, his Holiness
had set up a claim to the kingdom which, in the temper of the times,
might perhaps have been deemed superior both to that of Robert Bruce,
and that of Edward of England, and he conceived his monarch would give
him little thanks for any fresh embroilment which might take place with
the Church. Moreover, It was easy to place a watch, so as to prevent
Augustine from escaping during the night; and on the following morning
he would be still as effectually in the power of the English governor
as if he were seized on by open force at the present moment. Sir John
de Walton, however, so far exerted his authority over the abbot, that
he engaged, in consideration of the sanctuary being respected for this
space of time, that, when it expired, he would be aiding and assisting
with his spiritual authority to surrender the youth, should he not
allege a sufficient reason to the contrary. This arrangement, which
appeared still to flatter the governor with the prospect of an easy
termination of this troublesome dispute, induced him to grant the delay
which Augustine rather demanded than petitioned for.

"At your request, Father Abbot, whom I have hitherto found a true man,
I will indulge this youth with the grace he asks, before taking him
into custody, understanding that he shall not be permitted to leave
this place; and thou art to be responsible to this effect, giving thee,
as is reasonable, power to command our little, garrison at Hazelside,
to which I will send a reinforcement on my return to the Castle, in
case it should be necessary to use the strong hand, or circumstances
impose upon me other measures."

"Worthy Sir Knight," replied the Abbot, "I have no idea that the
frowardness of this youth will render any course necessary, saving that
of persuasion; and I venture to say, that you yourself will in the
highest degree approve of the method in which I shall acquit myself of
my present trust."

The abbot went through the duties of hospitality, enumerating what
simple cheer the cloister of the convent permitted him to offer to the
English knight. Sir John de Walton declined the offer of refreshment,
however--took a courteous leave of the churchman, and did not spare his
horse until the noble animal had brought him again before the Castle of
Douglas. Sir Aymer De Valence met him on the drawbridge, and reported
the state of the garrison to be the same in winch he had left it,
excepting that intimation had been received that twelve or fifteen men
were expected on their way to the town of Lanark; and being on march
from the neighbourhood of Ayr, would that night take up their quarters
at the outpost of Hazelside.

"I am glad of it," replied the governor; "I was about to strengthen
that detachment. This stripling, the son of Bertram the minstrel, or
whoever he is, has engaged to deliver himself up for examination in the
morning. As this party of soldiers are followers of your uncle, Lord
Pembroke, may I request you will ride to meet them, and command them to
remain at Hazelside until you make farther enquiries about this youth,
who has still to clear up the mystery which hangs about him, and reply
to a letter which I delivered with my own hand to the Abbot of Saint
Bride. I have shown too much forbearance in this matter, and I trust to
your looking to the security of this young man, and conveying him
hither, with all due care and attention, as being a prisoner of some
importance."

"Certainly, Sir John," answered Sir Aymer; "your orders shall be
obeyed, since you have none of greater importance for one who hath the
honour to be second only to yourself in this place."

"I crave your mercy, Sir Aymer," returned the governor, "if the
commission be in any degree beneath your dignity; but it is our
misfortune to misunderstand each other, when we endeavour to be most
intelligible."

"But what am I to do," said Sir Aymer--"no way disputing your command,
but only asking for information--what am I to do, if the Abbot of Saint
Bride offers opposition?"

"How!" answered Sir John de Walton; "with the reinforcement from. my
Lord of Pembroke, you will command at least twenty war-men, with bow
and spear, against five or six timid old monks, with only gown and,
hood."

"True," said Sir Aymer, "but ban and excommunication are sometimes; In
the present day, too hard for the mail coat, and I would not willingly
be thrown out of the pale of the Christian Church."

"Well, then, thou very suspicious and scrupulous young man," replied De
Walton, "know that if this youth does not deliver himself up to thee of
his own accord, the abbot has promised to put him into thy hands."

There was no farther answer to be made, and De Valence, though still
thinking himself unnecessarily harassed with the charge of a petty
commission, took the sort of half arms which were always used when the
knights stirred, beyond the walls of the garrison, and proceeded to
execute the commands of De Walton. A horseman or two, together with his
squire Fabian, accompanied him.

The evening closed in with one of those Scottish mists which are
commonly said to be equal to the showers of happier climates; the path
became more and more dark, the hills more wreathed in vapours, and more
difficult to traverse; and all the little petty inconveniences which
rendered travelling through the district slow and uncertain, were
augmented by the density of the fog which overhung every thing.

Sir Aymer, therefore, occasionally mended his pace, and often incurred
the fate of one who is over-late, delaying himself by his efforts to
make greater expedition. The knight bethought himself that he would get
into a straight road by passing through the almost deserted town of
Douglas--the inhabitants of which had been treated so severely by the
English, in the course of those fierce troubles, that most of them who
were capable of bearing arms had left it, and withdrawn themselves to
different parts of the country. This almost deserted place was defended
by a rude palisade, and a ruder drawbridge, which gave entrance into
streets so narrow, as to admit with difficulty three horses abreast,
and evincing with what strictness the ancient lords of the village
adhered to their prejudice against fortifications, and their opinion in
favour of keeping the field, so quaintly expressed in the well-known
proverb of the family,--"It is better to hear the lark sing than the
mouse cheep." The streets, or rather the lanes, were dark, but for a
shifting gleam of moonlight, which, as that planet began to rise, was
now and then visible upon some steep and narrow gable. No sound of
domestic industry, or domestic festivity, was heard, and no ray of
candle or firelight glanced from the windows of the houses; the ancient
ordinance called the curfew, which the Conqueror had introduced into
England, was at this time in full force in such parts of Scotland as
were thought doubtful, and likely to rebel; under which description it
need not be said the ancient possessions of the Douglas were most
especially regarded. The Church, whose Gothic monuments were of a
magnificent character, had been, as far as possible, destroyed by fire;
but the ruins, held together by the weight of the massive stones of
which they were composed, still sufficiently evinced the greatness of
the family at whose cost it had been raised, and whose bones, from
immemorial time, had been entombed in its crypts.

Paying little attention to these relics of departed splendour, Sir
Aymer de Valence advanced with his small detachment, and had passed the
scattered fragments of the cemetery of the Douglasses, when to his
surprise, the noise of his horse's feet was seemingly replied to by
sounds which rung like those of another knightly steed advancing
heavily up the street, as if it were to meet him. Valence was unable to
conjecture what might be the cause of these warlike sounds; the ring
and the clang of armour was distinct, and the heavy tramp of a
war-horse was not to be mistaken by the ear of a warrior. The
difficulty of keeping soldiers from straying out of quarters by night,
would have sufficiently accounted for the appearance of a straggling
foot-soldier; but it was more difficult to account for a mounted
horseman, in full armour; and such was the apparition which a
peculiarly bright glimpse of moonlight now showed at the bottom of the
causewayed hill. Perhaps the unknown warrior obtained at the same time
a glance of Aymer de Valence and his armed followers--at least each of
them shouted "Who goes there?"--the alarm of the times; and on the
instant the deep answers of "St. George!" on the one side, and "The
Douglas!" on the other, awakened the still echoes of the small and
ruinous street, and the silent arches of the dilapidated church.
Astonished at a war-cry with which so many recollections were
connected, the English knight spurred his horse at full gallop down the
steep and broken descent leading out at the south or south-east gate of
the town; and it was the work of an instant to call out, "Ho! Saint
George! upon the insolent villain all of you!--To the gate, Fabian, and
cut him off from flight! --Saint George! I say, for England! Bows and
bills!--bows and bills!" At the same time Aymer de Valence laid in rest
his own long lance, which he snatched from the squire by whom it was
carried. But the light was seen and gone in an instant, and though De
Valence concluded that the hostile warrior had hardly room to avoid his
career, yet he could take no aim for the encounter, unless by mere
guess, and continued to plunge down the dark declivity, among shattered
stones and other encumbrances, without groping out with his lance the
object of his pursuit. He rode, in short, at a broken gallop, a descent
of about fifty or sixty yards, without having any reason to suppose
that he had met the figure which had appeared to him, although the
narrowness of the street scarcely admitted his having passed him,
unless both horse and horseman could have melted at the moment of
encounter like an air-bubble. The riders of his suite, meanwhile, were
struck with a feeling like supernatural terror, which a number of
singular adventures, had caused most of them to attach to the name of
Douglas; and when he reached the gate by which the broken street was
terminated, there was none close behind him but Fabian, in whose head
no suggestions of a timorous nature could outlive the sound of his dear
master's voice.

Here there were a post of English, archers, who were turning out in
considerable alarm, when De Valence and his page rode in amongst them.
"Villains!" shouted De Valence, "why were you not upon your duty? Who
was it passed through your post even now, with the traitorous cry of
Douglas?"

"We know of no such," said the captain of the watch.

"That is to say, you besotted villains," answered the young knight,
"you have been drinking, and have slept?"

The men protested the contrary, but in a confused manner, which was far
from overcoming De Valence's suspicions. He called loudly to bring
cressets, torches, and candles; and a few remaining inhabitants began
to make their unwilling appearance, with such various means of giving
light as they chanced to possess. They heard the story of the young
English knight with wonder; nor, although it was confirmed by all his
retinue, did they give credit to the recital, more than that the
Englishmen wished somehow or other to pick a quarrel with the people of
the palace, under the pretence of their having admitted a retainer of
their ancient lord by night into the town. They protested, therefore,
their innocence of the cause of tumult, and endeavoured to seem active
in hastening from house to house, and corner to corner, with their
torches, in order to discover the invisible cavalier. The English
suspected them no less of treachery, than the Scottish imagined the
whole matter a pretext for bringing an accusation, on the part of the
young knight, against the citizens. The women, however, who now began
to issue from the houses, had a key for the solution of the apparition,
which at that time was believed of efficacy sufficient to solve any
mystery. "The devil," they said, "must have appeared visibly amongst
them," an explanation which had already occurred to the followers of
the young knight; for that a living man and horse, both as it seemed,
of a gigantic size, could be conjured in the twinkling of an eye, and
appear in a street secured at one end by the best of the archers, and
at the other by the horsemen under Valence himself, was altogether, it
seemed, a thing impossible. The inhabitants did not venture to put
their thoughts on the subject into language, for fear of giving
offence, and only indicated by a passing word to each other the secret
degree of pleasure which they felt in the confusion and embarrassment
of the English garrison. Still, however, they continued to affect a
great deal of interest in the alarm which De Valence had received, and
the anxiety which he expressed to discover the cause.

At length a female voice spoke above the Babel of confused sounds,
saying, "Where is the Southern Knight? I am sure that I can tell him
where he can find the only person who can help him out of his present
difficulty."

"And who is that, good woman?" said Aymer de Valence, who was growing
every moment more impatient at the loss of time, which was flying fast,
in an investigation which had something vexatious in it, and even
ridiculous. At the same time, the sight of an armed partisan of the
Douglasses, in their own native town, seemed to bode too serious
consequences, if it should be suffered to pass without being probed to
the bottom.

"Come hither to me," said the female voice, "and I will name to you the
only person who can explain all matters of this kind that chance in
this country." On this the knight snatched a torch from some of those
who were present, and holding it up, descried the person who spoke, a
tall woman, who evidently endeavoured to render herself remarkable.
When he approached her, she communicated her intelligence in a grave
and sententious tone of voice.

"We had once wise men, that could have answered any parables which
might have been put to them for explanation in this country side.
Whether you yourselves, gentlemen, have not had some hand in weeding
them out, good troth, it is not for the like of me to say; at any rate,
good counsel is not so easy come by as it was in this Douglas country,
nor, may be, is it a safe thing to pretend to the power of giving it."

"Good woman," said De Valence, "if you will give me an explanation of
this mystery, I will owe you a kirtle of the best raploch grey."

"It is not I," said the old woman, "that pretend to possess the
knowledge which may assist you; but I would fain know that the man whom
I shall name to you shall be skaithless and harmless. Upon your
knighthood and your honour, will you promise to me so much?"

"Assuredly," said De Valence, "such a person shall even have thanks and
reward, if he is a faithful informer; ay, and pardon, moreover,
although he may have listened to any dangerous practices, or been
concerned in any plots."

"Oh! not he," replied the female; "it is old Goodman Powheid, who has
the charge of the muniments," (meaning probably monuments,) "that is,
such part of them as you English have left standing; I mean the old
sexton of the kirk of Douglas, who can tell more stories of these old
folk, whom your honour is not very fond of hearing named, than would
last us from this day to Yule."

"Does anybody," said the knight, "know whom it is that this old woman
means?"

"I conjecture," replied Fabian, "that she speaks of an old dotard, who
is, I think, the general referee concerning the history and antiquities
of this old town, and of the savage family that lived here perhaps
before the flood."

"And who, I dare say," said the knight, "knows as much about the matter
as she herself does. But where is this man? a sexton is he? He may be
acquainted with places of concealment, which are often fabricated in
Gothic buildings, and known to those whose business calls them to
frequent them. Come, my good old dame, bring this man to me; or, what
may be better, I will go to him, for we have already spent too much
time."

"Time!" replied the old woman,--"is time an object with your honour? I
am sure I can hardly get so much for mine as will hold soul and body
together. You are not far from the old man's house."

She led the way accordingly, blundering over heaps of rubbish, and
encountering all the embarrassments of a ruinous street, in lighting
the way to Sir Aymer, who, giving his horse to one of his attendants,
and desiring Fabian to be ready at a call, scrambled after as well as
the slowness of his guide would permit.

Both were soon involved in the remains of the old church, much
dilapidated as it had been by wanton damage done to it by the soldiery,
and so much impeded by rubbish, that the knight marvelled how the old
woman could find the way. She kept talking all the while as she
stumbled onward. Sometimes she called out in a screeching tone,
"Powheid! Lazarus Powheid!"--and then muttered---"Ay, ay, the old man
will be busy with some of his duties, as he calls them; I wonder he
fashes wi' them in these times. But never mind, I warrant they will
last for his day and for mine; and the times, Lord help us! for all
that I can see, are well enough for those that are to live in them."

"Are you sure, good woman," replied the knight, "that there is any
inhabitant in these ruins? For my part, I should rather suppose that
you are taking me to the charnel-house of the dead."

"Maybe you are right," said the old woman, with a ghastly laugh;
"carles and carlines agree weel with funeral vaults and charnel-houses,
and when an auld bedral dwells near the dead, he is living, ye ken,
among his customers--Halloo! Powheid! Lazarus Powheid! there is a
gentleman would speak with you;" and she added, with some sort of
emphasis, "an. English noble gentleman---one of the honourable
garrison."

An old man's step was now heard advancing, so slowly that the
glimmering light which he held in his hand was visible on the ruined
walls of the vault some time before it showed the person who bore it.

The shadow of the old man was also projected upon the illuminated wall
ere his person came in view; his dress was in considerable confusion,
owing to his having been roused from his bed; and since artificial
light was forbidden by the regulations of the garrison, the natives of
Douglas Dale spent in sleep the time that they could not very well get
rid of by any other means. The sexton was a tall thin man, emaciated by
years and by privations; his body was bent habitually by his occupation
of grave-digging, and his eye naturally inclined downward to the scene
of his labours. His hand sustained the cruise or little lamp, which he
held so as to throw light upon his visitant; at the same time it
displayed to the young knight the features of the person with whom he
was now confronted, which, though neither handsome nor pleasing, were
strongly marked, sagacious, and venerable, indicating, at the same
time, a certain air of dignity, which age, even mere poverty, may be
found occasionally to bestow, as conferring that last melancholy
species of independence proper to those whose situation can hardly by
any imaginable means, be rendered much worse than years and fortune
have already made it. The habit of a lay brother added somewhat of
religious importance to his appearance.

"What would you with me, young man?" said the sexton. "Your youthful
features, and your gay dress, bespeak one who stands in need of my
ministry neither for himself nor for others."

"I am indeed," replied the knight, "a living man, and therefore need
not either shovel or pick-axe for my own behoof. I am not, as you see,
attired in mourning, and therefore need not your offices in behalf of
any friend; I would only ask you a few questions."

"What you would have done must needs be done, you being at present one
of our rulers, and, as I think, a man of authority," replied the
sexton; "follow me this way into my poor habitation; I have had a
better in my day; and yet, Heaven knows, it is good enough for me, when
many men of much greater consequence must perforce content themselves
with worse."

He opened a lowly door, which was fitted, though irregularly, to serve
as the entrance of a vaulted apartment, where it appeared that the old
man held, apart from the living world, his wretched and solitary
dwelling. [Footnote: [This is a most graphic and accurate description
of the present state of the ruin. Its being occupied by the sexton as a
dwelling-place, and the whole scene of the old man's interview with De
Valence, may be classed with our illustrious author's most felicitous
imaginings._--Note by the Rev. Mr. Stewart of Douglas._]] The floor,
composed of paving stones, laid together with some accuracy, and here
and there inscribed with letters and hieroglyphics, as if they had once
upon a time served to distinguish sepulchres, was indifferently well
swept, and a fire at the upper end directed its smoke into a hole which
served for a chimney. The spade and pick-axe, (with other tools,) which
the chamberlain of mortality makes use of, lay scattered about the
apartment, and, with a rude stool or two, and a table, where some
inexperienced hand had unquestionably supplied the labours of the
joiner, were nearly the only furniture, if we include the old man's bed
of straw, lying in a corner, and discomposed, as if he had been just
raised from it. At the lower end of the apartment, the wall was almost
entirely covered by a large escutcheon, such as is usually hung over
the graves of men of very high rank, having the appropriate quarters,
to the number of sixteen, each properly blazoned and distinct, placed
as ornaments around the principal armorial coat itself.

"Let us sit," said the old man; "the posture will better enable my
failing ears to apprehend your meaning, and the asthma will deal with
me more mercifully in permitting me to make you understand mine."

A peal of short asthmatic coughs attested the violence of the disorder
which he had last named, and the young knight followed his host's
example, in sitting down on one of the rickety stools by the side of
the fire. The old man brought from one corner of the apartment an
apron, which he occasionally wore, full of broken boards in irregular
pieces, some of which were covered with black cloth, or driven full of
nails, black, as it might happen, or gilded.

"You will find this fresh fuel necessary," said the old man, "to keep
some degree of heat within this waste apartment; nor are the vapours of
mortality, with which this vault is apt to be filled, if the fire is
permitted to become extinct, indifferent to the lungs of the dainty and
the healthy, like your worship, though to me they are become habitual.
The wood will catch fire, although it is some time ere the damps of the
grave are overcome by the drier air, and the warmth of the chimney."

Accordingly, the relics of mortality with which the old man had heaped
his fireplace, began by degrees to send forth a thick unctuous vapour,
which at length leaped to light, and blazing up the aperture, gave a
degree of liveliness to the gloomy scene. The blazonry of the huge
escutcheon met and returned the rays with as brilliant a reflection as
that lugubrious object was capable of, and the whole apartment looked
with a fantastic gaiety, strangely mingled with the gloomy ideas which
its ornaments were calculated to impress upon the imagination.

"You are astonished," said the old man, "and perhaps, Sir Knight, you
have never before seen these relics of the dead applied to the purpose
of rendering the living, in some degree, more comfortable than their
condition would otherwise admit of."

"Comfortable!" returned the Knight of Valence, shrugging his shoulders;
"I should be sorry, old man, to know that I had a dog that was as
indifferently quartered as thou art, whose grey hairs have certainly
seen better days."

"It may be," answered the sexton, "and it may be otherwise; but it was
not, I presume, concerning my own history that your worship seemed
disposed to ask me some questions; and I would venture to enquire,
therefore, to whom they have relation?"

"I will speak plainly to you," replied Sir Aymer, "and you will at once
acknowledge the necessity of giving a short and distinct reply. I have
even now met in the streets of this village a person only shown to me
by a single flash of light, who had the audacity to display the
armorial insignia and utter the war-cry of the Douglasses; nay, if I
could trust a transient glance, this daring cavalier had the features
and the dark complexion proper to the Douglas. I am referred to thee as
to one who possesses means of explaining this extraordinary
circumstance, which, as an English knight, and one holding a charge
under King Edward, I am particularly called upon to make enquiry into."

"Let me make a distinction," said the old man. "The Douglasses of
former generations are my near neighbours, and, according to my
superstitious townsmen, my acquaintances and visitors; I can take it
upon my conscience to be answerable for their good behaviour, and to
become bound that none of the old barons, to whom the roots of that
mighty tree may, it is said, be traced, will again disturb with their
war-cry the towns or villages of their native country--not one will
parade in moonshine the black armour which has long rusted upon their
tombs.

    'The knights are dust.
     And their good swords are rust;
     Their souls are with the saints, we trust.' [Footnote: [The author
has somewhat altered part of a beautiful unpublished fragment of
Coleridge:--
    "Where is the grave of Sir Arthur Orellan,--
     Where may the grave of that good knight be?
       By the marge of a brook, on the slope of Helvellyn,
     Under the boughs of a young birch tree.
       The Oak that in summer was pleasant to hear,
       That rustled in Autumn all withered and sear,
       That whistled and groan'd thro' the Winter alone,
       He hath gone, and a birch in his place is grown.
           The knight's bones are dust,
           His good sword is rust;
           His spirit is with, the saints, we trust." _Edit_.]]

Look around, Sir Knight, you have above and around you the men of whom
we speak. Beneath us, in a little aisle, (which hath not been opened
since these thin grey locks were thick and brown,) there lies the first
man whom I can name as memorable among those of this mighty line. It is
he whom the Thane of Athol pointed out to the King of Scotland as
Sholto Dhuglass, or the dark iron-coloured man, whose exertions had
gained the battle for his native prince; and who, according to this
legend, bequeathed his name to our dale and town, though others say
that the race assumed the name of Douglass from the stream so called in
unrecorded times, before they had their fastness on its banks. Others,
his descendants, called Eachain, or Hector the first, and Orodh, or
Hugh, William, the first of that name, and Gilmour, the theme of many a
minstrel song, commemorating achievements done under the oriflamme of
Charles the Great, Emperor of France, have all consigned themselves to
their last sleep, nor has their memory been sufficiently preserved from
the waste of time. Something we know concerning their great deeds,
their great power, and, alas! their great crimes. Something we also
know of a Lord of Douglas who sat in a parliament at Forfar, held by
King Malcolm the First, and we are aware that from his attachment to
hunting the wild hart, he built himself a tower called Blackhouse, in
the forest of Ettrick, which perhaps still exists."

"I crave your forgiveness, old man," said the knight, "but I have no
time at present to bestow upon the recitation of the pedigree of the
House of Douglas. A less matter would hold a well-breathed minstrel in
subject for recitation for a calendar month, Sundays and holidays
included."

"What other information can you expect from me," said the sexton, "than
that respecting those heroes, some of whom it has been my lot to
consign to that eternal rest, which will for ever divide the dead from
the duties of this world? I have told you where the race sleep, down to
the reign of the royal Malcolm. I can tell you also of another vault,
in which lie Sir John of Douglas-burn, with his son Lord Archibald, and
a third William, known by an indenture with Lord Abernethy. Lastly, I
can tell you of him to whom that escutcheon, with its appurtenances of
splendour and dignity, justly belong. Do you envy that nobleman, whom,
if death were in the sound, I would not hesitate to term my honourable
patron? and have you any design of dishonouring his remains? It will be
a poor victory! nor does it become a knight and nobleman to come in
person to enjoy such a triumph over the dead, against whom, when he
lived, there were few knights dared spur their horses. He fought in
defence of his country, but he had not the good fortune of most of his
ancestors, to die on the field of battle. Captivity, sickness, and
regret for the misfortunes of his native land, brought his head to the
grave in his prison-house, in the land of the stranger."

The old man's voice here became interrupted by emotion, and the English
knight found it difficult to continue his examination in the stern
fashion which his duty required.

"Old man," he said, "I do not require from thee this detail, which must
be useless to me, as well as painful to thyself. Thou dost but thy duty
in rendering justice to thy ancient lord; but thou hast not yet
explained to me why I have met in this town, this very night, and not
half an hour since, a person in the arms, and bearing the complexion,
of one of the Black Douglasses, who cried his war-cry as if in contempt
of his conquerors."

"Surely," replied the sexton, "it is not my business to explain such a
fancy, otherwise than by supposing that the natural fears of the
Southron will raise the spectre of a Douglas at any time, when he is
within sight of their sepulchre. Methinks, in such a night as this, the
fairest cavalier would wear the complexion of this swarthy race, nor
can I hold it wonderful that the war-cry which was once in the throats
of so many thousands in this country, should issue upon occasion from
the mouth of a single champion."

"You are bold, old man," returned the English knight; "do you consider
that your life is in my power, and that it may, in certain cases, be my
duty to inflict death with that degree of pain at which humanity
shudders?"

The old man rose up slowly in the light of the blazing fire, displaying
his emaciated features, which resembled those ascribed by artists to
Saint Anthony of the desert; and pointing to the feeble lamp, which he
placed upon the coarse table, thus addressed his interrogator, with an
appearance of perfect firmness, and something even resembling dignity:--

"Young knight of England, you see that utensil constructed for the
purpose of dispensing light amid these fatal vaults,--it is as frail as
any thing can well be, whose flame is supplied by living element,
contained in a frame composed of iron. It is doubtless in your power
entirely to end its service, by destroying the frame, or extinguishing
the light. Threaten it with such annihilation, Sir Knight, and see
whether your menace will impress any sense of fear either on the
element or the iron. Know that you have no more power over the frail
mortal whom you threaten with similar annihilation. You may tear from
my body the skin in which it is now swathed, but although my nerves
might glow with agony during the inhuman operation, it would produce no
more impression on me than flaying on the stag which an arrow has
previously pierced through the heart. My age sets me beyond your
cruelty: if you think otherwise, call your agents, and commence your
operations; neither threats nor inflictions will enable you to extort
from me any thing that I am not ready to tell you of my own accord."

"You trifle with me, old man," said De Valence; "you talk as if you
possessed some secret respecting the motions of these Douglasses, who
are to you as gods, yet you communicate no intelligence to me whatever."

"You may soon know," replied the old man, "all that a poor sexton has
to communicate; and it will not increase your knowledge respecting the
living, though it may throw some light upon my proper domains, which
are those of the dead. The spirits of the deceased Douglasses do not
rest in their graves during the dishonour of their monuments, and the
downfall of their house. That, upon death, the greater part of any line
are consigned to the regions of eternal bliss, or of never-ending
misery, religion will not suffer us to believe, and amidst a race who
had so great a share of worldly triumph and prosperity, we must suppose
there have existed many who have been justly subjected to the doom of
an intermediate space of punishment. You have destroyed the
temples--which were built by their posterity to propitiate Heaven for
the welfare of their souls; you have silenced the prayers and stopt the
choirs, by the mediation of which the piety of children had sought to
appease the wrath of Heaven in behalf of their ancestors, subjected to
expiatory fires. Can you wonder that the tormented spirits, thus
deprived of the relief which had been proposed to them, should not,
according to the common phrase, rest in their graves? Can you wonder
they should show themselves like discontented loiterers near to the
places which, but for the manner in which you have prosecuted your
remorseless warfare, might have ere now afforded them rest? Or do you
marvel that these fleshless warriors should interrupt your marches, and
do what else their airy nature may permit to disturb your councils, and
meet as far as they may the hostilities which you make it your boast to
carry on, as well against those who are deceased, as against any who
may yet survive your cruelty?"

"Old man," replied Aymer de Valence, "you cannot expect that I am to
take for answer a story like this, being a fiction too gross to charm
to sleep a schoolboy tormented with the toothache; nevertheless, I
thank God that thy doom does not remain in my hands. My squire and two
archers shall carry thee captive to the worshipful Sir John de Walton,
Governor of the Castle and Valley, that he may deal with thee as seems
meet; nor is he a person to believe in your apparitions and ghosts from
purgatory.--What ho! Fabian! Come hither, and bring with thee two
archers of the guard."

Fabian accordingly, who had waited at the entrance of the ruined
building, now found his way, by the light of the old sexton's lamp, and
the sound of his master's voice, into the singular apartment of the old
man, the strange decorations of which struck the youth with great
surprise, and some horror.

"Take the two archers with thee, Fabian," said the Knight of Valence,
"and, with their assistance, convey this old man, on horseback, or in a
litter, to the presence of the worshipful Sir John de Walton. Tell him
what we have seen, which thou didst witness as well as I; and tell him
that this old sexton, whom I send to be examined by his superior
wisdom, seems to know more than he is willing to disclose respecting
our ghostly cavalier, though he will give us no account of him, except
intimating that he is a spirit of the old Douglasses from purgatory, to
which Sir John de Walton will give what faith he pleases. You may say,
that, for my part, my belief is, either that the sexton is crazed by
age, want, and enthusiasm, or that he is connected with some plot which
the country people are hatching. You may also say that I shall not use
much ceremony with the youth under the care of the Abbot of St. Bride;
there is something suspicious in all the occurrences that are now
passing around us."

Fabian promised obedience; and the knight, pulling him aside, gave him
an additional caution, to behave with attention in this business,
seeing he must recollect that neither the judgment of himself, nor that
of his master, were apparently held in very much esteem by the
governor; and that it would ill become them to make any mistake in a
matter where the safety of the Castle was perhaps concerned.

"Fear me not, worshipful sir," replied the youth; "I am returning to
pure air in the first place, and a good fire in the second, both
acceptable exchanges for this dungeon of suffocating vapours and
execrable smells. You may trust to my making no delay; a very short
time will carry me back to Castle Douglas, even moving with suitable
attention to this old man's bones."

"Use him humanely," answered the knight. "And thou, old man, if thou
art insensible to threats of personal danger in this matter, remember,
that if thou art found paltering with us, thy punishment will perhaps
be more severe than any we can inflict upon thy person."

"Can you administer the torture to the soul?" said the sexton.

"As to thee," answered the knight, "we have that power;--we will
dissolve every monastery or religious establishment held for the souls
of these Douglasses, and will only allow the religious people to hold
their residence there upon condition of their praying for the soul of
King Edward the First of glorious memory, the _malleus Scotorum_; and
if the Douglasses are deprived of the ghostly benefit of the prayers
and services of such shrines, they may term thy obstinacy the cause."

"Such a species of vengeance," answered the old man, in the same bold
unsubdued tone which he had hitherto used, "were more worthy of the
infernal fiends than of Christian men."

The squire raised his hand. The knight interposed: "Forbear him," he
said, "Fabian, he is very old, and perhaps insane.--And you, sexton,
remember that the vengeance threatened is lawfully directed towards a
family which have been the obstinate supporters of the excommunicated
rebel, who murdered the Red Comyn at the High Church in Dumfries."

So saying, Aymer strode out of the ruins, picking his way with much
difficulty--took his horse, which he found at the entrance--repeated a
caution to Fabian, to conduct himself with prudence--and, passing on to
the south-western gate, gave the strongest injunctions concerning the
necessity of keeping a vigilant watch, both by patrols and by
sentinels, intimating, at the same time, that it must have been
neglected during the preceding part of the evening. The men murmured an
apology, the confusion of which seemed to express that there had
existed some occasion for the reprimand.

Sir Aymer then proceeded on his journey to Hazelside, his train
diminished by the absence of Fabian and his assistants. After a hasty,
but not a short journey, the knight alighted at Thomas Dickson's, where
he found the detachment from Ayr had arrived before him, and were
snugly housed for the night. He sent one of the archers to announce his
approach to the Abbot of Saint Bride and his young guest, intimating at
the same time, that the archer must keep sight of the latter until he
himself arrived at the chapel, which would be instantly.





     When the nightengale singes, the wodes waxes grene,
     Lef, and gras, and blosme, springeth in April I wene,
     And love is to myne herte gone with one speare so kene.
     Night and day my blood hyt drynkes, mine herte deth me fane.
          _MSS. Hail. Quoted by Warton._


Sir Aymer De Valance had no sooner followed his archer to the convent
of Saint Bride, than he summoned the abbot to his presence, who came
with the air of a man who loves his ease, and who is suddenly called
from the couch where he has consigned himself to a comfortable repose,
at the summons of one whom he does not think it safe to disobey, and to
whom he would not disguise his sense of peevishness, if he durst.

"It is a late ride," he said, "which has brought your worthy honour
hither from the castle. May I be informed of the cause, after the
arrangement so recently gone into with the governor?"

"It is my hope," replied the knight, "that you, Father Abbot, are not
already conscious of it; suspicions are afloat, and I myself have this
night seen something to confirm them, that some of the obstinate rebels
of this country are again setting afoot dangerous practices, to the
peril of the garrison; and I come, father, to see whether, in requital
of many favours received from the English monarch, you will not merit
his bounty and protection, by contributing to the discovery of the
designs of his enemies."

"Assuredly so," answered Father Jerome, in an agitated voice. "Most
unquestionably my information should stand at your command; that is, if
I knew any thing the communication of which could be of advantage to
you."

"Father Abbot," replied the English knight, "although it is rash to
make myself responsible for a North-country man in these times, yet I
own I do consider you as one who has ever been faithfully subject to
the King of England, and I willingly hope that you will still continue
so."

"And a fine encouragement I have!" said the abbot; "to be called out of
my bed at midnight, in this raw weather, to undergo the examination of
a knight, who is the youngest, perhaps, of his own honourable rank, and
who will not tell me the subject of the interrogatories, but detains me
on this cold pavement, till, according to the opinion of Celsus, the
podagra which lurks in my feet may be driven into my stomach, and then
good-night to abbacy and examinations from henceforward."

"Good father," said the young man, "the spirit of the times must teach
thee patience; recollect that I can feel no pleasure in this duty, and
that if an insurrection should take place, the rebels, who are
sufficiently displeased with thee for acknowledging the English
monarch, would hang thee from thine own steeple to feed the crows; or
that, if thou hast secured thy peace by some private compact with the
insurgents, the English governor, who will sooner or later gain the
advantage, will not fail to treat thee as a rebel to his sovereign."

"It may appear to you, my noble son," answered the abbot, obviously
discomposed, "that I am hung up, in this case, on the horns of the
dilemma which you have stated; nevertheless, I protest to you, that if
any one accuses me of conspiring with the rebels against the King of
England, I am ready, provided you give me time to swallow a potion
recommended by Celsus in my perilous case, to answer with the most
perfect sincerity every question which you can put to me upon that
subject." So saying, he called upon a monk who had attended at his
levee, and giving him a large key, whispered something in his ear. The
cup which the monk brought was of such capacity as proved Celsus's
draught required to be administered in considerable quantity, and a
strong smell which it spread through the apartment, accredited the
knight's suspicion that the medicine chiefly consisted of what were
then termed distilled waters, a preparation known in the monasteries
for some time before that comfortable secret had reached the laity in
general. The abbot, neither overawed by the strength nor by the
quantity of the potion, took it off with what he himself would have
called a feeling of solace and pleasance, and his voice became much
more composed; he signified himself as comforted extraordinarily by the
medicine, and willing to proceed to answer any questions which could be
put to him by his gallant young friend.

"At present," said the knight, "you are aware, father, that strangers
travelling through this country, must be the first objects of our
suspicions and enquiries. What is, for example, your own opinion of the
youth termed Augustine, the son, or calling himself so, of a person
called Bertram the minstrel, who has resided for some days in your
convent?"

The abbot heard the question with eyes expressive of surprise at the
quarter from which it came.

"Assuredly," said he, "I think of him as a youth who, from any thing I
have seen, is of that excellent disposition, both with respect to
loyalty and religion, which I should have expected, were I to judge
from the estimable person who committed him to my care."

With this the abbot bowed to the knight, as if he had conceived that
this repartee gave him a silencing advantage in any question which
could follow upon that subject; and he was probably, therefore,
surprised when Sir Aymer replied as follows:

"It is very true, Father Abbot, that I myself did recommend this
stripling to you as a youth of a harmless disposition, and with respect
to whom it would be unnecessary to exercise the strict vigilance
extended to others in similar circumstances; but the evidence which
seemed to me to vouch for this young man's innocence, has not appeared
so satisfactory to my superior and commander; and it is by his orders
that I now make farther enquiries of you. You must think they are of
consequence, since we again trouble you, and at so unwonted an hour."

"I can only protest by my order, and by the veil of Saint Bride,"
replied the abbot, the spirit of Celsus appearing to fail his pupil,
"that whatever evil may be in this matter, is totally unknown to
me--nor could it be extorted from me by racks or implements of torture.
Whatever signs of disloyalty may have been evinced by this young man, I
have witnessed none of them, although I have been strictly attentive to
his behaviour."

"In what respect?" said the knight--"and what is the result of your
observation?"

"My answer," said the abbot of Saint Bride, "shall be sincere and
downright. The youth condescended upon payment of a certain number of
gold crowns, not by any means to repay the hospitality of the church of
Saint Bride, but merely"--

"Nay, father," interrupted the knight, "you may cut that short, since
the governor and I well understand the terms upon which the monks of
Saint Bride exercise their hospitality. In what manner, it is more
necessary to ask, was it received by this boy?"

"With the utmost gentleness and moderation, noble sir," answered the
abbot; "indeed it appeared to me, at first, that he might be a
troublesome guest, since the amount of his benevolence to the convent
was such as to encourage, and, in some degree, to authorise, his
demanding accommodation of a kind superior to what we had to bestow."

"In which case," said Sir Aymer, "you would have had the discomfort of
returning some part of the money you have received?"

"That," replied the abbot, "would have been a mode of settlement
contrary to our vows. What is paid to the treasury of Saint Bridget,
cannot, agreeably to our rule, be on any account restored. But, noble
knight, there was no occasion for this; a crust of white bread and a
draught of milk were diet sufficient to nourish this poor youth for a
day, and it was my own anxiety for his health that dictated the
furnishing of his cell with a softer bed and coverlet than are quite
consistent with the rules of our order."

"Now hearken to what I say, Sir Abbot, and answer me truly," said the
Knight of Valence--"What communication has this youth held with the
inmates of your convent, or with those beyond your house? Search your
memory concerning this, and let me have a distinct answer, for your
guest's safety and your own depend upon it."

"As I am a Christian man," said the abbot, "I have observed nothing
which could give ground for your worship's suspicions. The boy
Augustine, unlike those whom I have observed who have been educated in
the world, showed a marked preference to the company of such sisters as
the house of Saint Bride contains, rather than for that of the monks,
my brethren, although there are among them pleasant and conversible
men."

"Scandal," said the young knight, "might find a reason for that
preference."

"Not in the case of the sisters of Saint Bridget," said the abbot,
"most of whom have been either sorely misused by time, or their
comeliness destroyed by some mishap previously to their being received
into the seclusion of the house."

This observation the good father made with some internal movement of
mirth, which was apparently excited at the idea of the sisterhood of
Saint Bridget becoming attractive to any one by dint of their personal
beauty, in which, as it happened, they were all notably, and almost
ludicrously, deficient. The English knight, to whom the sisterhood were
well known, felt also inclined to smile at this conversation.

"I acquit," he said, "the pious sisterhood of charming, otherwise than
by their kind wishes, and attention to the wants of the suffering
stranger."

"Sister Beatrice," continued the father, resuming his gravity, "is
indeed blessed with a winning gift of making comfits and syllabubs;
but, on minute enquiry, I do not find that the youth has tasted any of
them. Neither is sister Ursula so hard-favoured by nature, as from the
effects of an accident; but your honour knows that when a woman is
ugly, the men do not trouble themselves about the cause of her hard
favour. I will go, with your leave, and see in what state the youth now
is, and summon him, before you."

"I request you to do so, father, for the affair is instant: and I
earnestly advise you to watch, in the closest manner, this Augustine's
behaviour: you cannot be too particular. I will wait your return, and
either carry the boy to the castle, or leave him here, as circumstances
may seem to require."

The abbot bowed, promised his utmost exertions, and hobbled out of the
room to wait on the youth Augustine in his cell, anxious to favour, if
possible, the wishes of De Valence, whom he looked upon as rendered by
circumstances his military patron.

He remained long absent, and Sir Aymer began to be of opinion that the
delay was suspicious, when the abbot returned with perplexity and
discomposure in his countenance.

"I crave your pardon for keeping your worship waiting," said Jerome,
with much anxiety; "but I have myself been detained and vexed by
unnecessary formalities and scruples on the part of this peevish boy.
In the first place, hearing my foot approaching his bedroom, my youth,
instead of undoing the door, which would have been but proper respect
to my place, on the contrary draws a strong bolt on the inside; and
this fastening, forsooth, has been placed on his chamber by Ursula's
command, that his slumbers might be suitably respected. I intimated to
him as I best could, that he must attend you without delay, and prepare
to accompany you to the Castle of Douglas; but he would not answer a
single word, save recommending to me patience, to which I was fain to
have recourse, as well as your archer, whom I found standing sentinel
before the door of the cell, and contenting himself with the assurance
of the sisters that there was no other passage by which Augustine could
make his escape. At length the door opens, and my young master presents
himself fully arrayed for his journey. The truth is, I think some fresh
attack of his malady has affected the youth; he may perhaps be
disturbed with some touch of hypochondria, or black choler, a species
of dotage of the mind, which is sometimes found concomitant with and
symptomatic of this disorder; but he is at present composed, and if
your worship chooses to see him, he is at your command."

"Call him hither," said the knight. And a considerable space of time
again elapsed ere the eloquence of the abbot, half chiding and half
soothing, prevailed on the lady, in her adopted character, to approach,
the parlour, in which at last she made her appearance, with a
countenance on which the marks of tears might still be discovered, and
a pettish sullenness, like that of a boy, or, with reverence, that of a
girl, who is determined upon taking her own way in any matter, and
equally resolved to give no reason for her doing so. Her hurried levee
had not prevented her attending closely to all the mufflings and
disguisings by which her pilgrim's dress was arranged, so as to alter
her appearance, and effectually disguise her sex. But as civility
prevented her wearing her large slouched hat, she necessarily exposed
her countenance more than in the open air; and though the knight beheld
a most lovely set of features, yet they were not such as were
inconsistent with the character she had adopted, and which she had
resolved upon maintaining to the last. She had, accordingly, mustered
up a degree of courage which was not natural to her, and which she
perhaps supported by hopes which her situation hardly admitted. So soon
as she found herself in the same apartment with De Valence, she assumed
a style of manners, bolder and more determined than she had hitherto
displayed.

"Your worship," she said, addressing him even before he spoke, "is a
knight of England, and possessed, doubtless, of the virtues which
become that noble station. I am an unfortunate lad, obliged, by reasons
which I am under the necessity of keeping secret, to travel in a
dangerous country, where I am suspected, without any just cause, of
becoming accessory to plots and conspiracies which are contrary to my
own interest, and which my very soul abhors; and which I might safely
abjure, by imprecating upon myself all the curses of our religion and
renouncing all its promises, if I were accessory to such designs, in
thought, word, or deed. Nevertheless, you, who will not believe my
solemn protestations, are about to proceed against me as a guilty
person, and in so doing I must warn you, Sir Knight, that you will
commit a great and cruel injustice."

"I shall endeavour to avoid that," said the knight, "by referring the
duty to Sir John de Walton, the governor, who will decide what is to be
done; in this case, my only duty will be to place you in his hands at
Douglas Castle."

"Must you do this?" said Augustine.

"Certainly," replied the knight, "or be answerable for neglecting my
duty."

"But if I become bound to answer your loss with a large sum of money, a
large tract of land"--

"No treasure, no land,--supposing such at your disposal," answered the
knight, "can atone for disgrace; and, besides, boy, how should I trust
to your warrant, were my avarice such as would induce me to listen to
such proposals?"

"I must then prepare to attend you instantly to the Castle of Douglas
and the presence of Sir John de Walton?" replied Augustine.

"Young man," answered De Valence, "there is no remedy, since if you
delay me longer, I must carry you thither by force."

"What will be the consequence to my father?" said the youth.

"That," replied the knight, "will depend exactly on the nature of your
confession and his; something you both have to say, as is evident from
the terms of the letter Sir John de Walton conveyed to you; and I
assure you, you were better to speak it out at once than to risk the
consequences of more delay. I can admit of no more trifling; and,
believe me, that your fate will be entirely ruled by your own frankness
and candour."

"I must prepare, then, to travel at your command," said the youth. "But
this cruel disease still hangs around me, and Abbot Jerome, whose
leech-craft is famous, will himself assure you that I cannot travel
without danger of my life; and that while I was residing in this
convent, I declined every opportunity of exercise which was offered me
by the kindness of the garrison at Hazelside, lest I might by mishap
bring the contagion among your men."

"The youth says right," said the abbot; "the archers and men-at-arms
have more than once sent to invite this lad to join in some of their
military games, or to amuse them, perhaps, with some of his minstrelsy;
but he has uniformly declined doing so; and, according to my belief, it
is the effects of this disorder which have prevented his accepting an
indulgence so natural to his age, and in so dull a place as the convent
of Saint Bride must needs seem to a youth bred up in the world."

"Do you then hold, reverend father," said Sir Aymer, "that there is
real danger in carrying this youth to the castle to-night, as I
proposed?"

"I conceive such danger," replied the abbot, "to exist, not only as it
may occasion the relapse of the poor youth himself, but as particularly
likely, no preparations having been made, to introduce the infection
among your honourable garrison; for it is in these relapses, more than
in the first violence of the malady, that it has been found most
contagious."

"Then," said the knight, "you must be content, my friend, to give a
share of your room to an archer, by way of sentinel."

"I cannot object," said Augustine, "provided my unfortunate vicinity
does not endanger the health of the poor soldier."

"He will be as ready to do his duty," said the abbot, "without the door
of the apartment as within it; and if the youth should sleep soundly,
which the presence of a guard in his chamber might prevent, he is the
more likely to answer your purpose on the morrow."

"Let it be so," said Sir Aymer; "so you are sure that you do not
minister any facility of escape."'

"The apartment," said the monk, "hath no other entrance than that which
is guarded by the archer; but, to content you, I shall secure the door
in your presence."

"So be it, then," said the Knight of Valence; "this done, I myself will
lie down without doffing my mail-shirt, and snatch a sleep till the
ruddy dawn calls me again to duty, when you, Augustine, will hold
yourself ready to attend me to our Castle of Douglas."

The bells of the convent summoned the inhabitants and inmates of Saint
Bride to morning prayers at the first peep of day. When this duty was
over, the knight demanded his prisoner. The abbot marshalled him to the
door of Augustine's chamber. The sentinel who was stationed there,
armed with a brown-bill, or species of partisan, reported that he had
heard no motion in the apartment during the whole night. The abbot
tapped at the door, but received no answer. He knocked again louder,
but the silence was unbroken from within.

"What means this?" said the reverend ruler of the convent of Saint
Bride; "my young patient has certainly fallen into a syncope or swoon!"

"I wish, Father Abbot," said the knight, "that he may not have made his
escape instead, an accident which both you and I may be required to
answer, since, according to our strict duty, we ought to have kept
sight of him, and detained him in close custody until daybreak."

"I trust your worship," said the abbot, "only anticipates a misfortune
which I cannot think possible."

"We shall speedily see," said the knight; and raising his voice, he
called aloud, so as to be heard within, "Bring crow-bars and levers,
and burst me that door into splinters without an instant's delay."

The loudness of his voice, and the stern tone in which he spoke, soon
brought around him the brethren of the house, and two or three soldiers
of his own party, who were already busy in caparisoning their horses.
The displeasure of the young knight was manifested by his flushed
features, and the abrupt manner in which he again repeated his commands
for breaking open the door. This was speedily performed, though it
required the application of considerable strength, and as the shattered
remains fell crashing into the apartment, De Valence sprung, and the
abbot hobbled, into the cell of the prisoner, which, to the fulfilment
of their worst suspicions, they found empty.





     Where is he? Has the deep earth swallow'd him?
     Or hath he melted like some airy phantom
     That shuns the approach of morn and the young sun?
     Or hath he wrapt him in Cimmerian darkness,
     And pass'd beyond the circuit of the sight
     With things of the night's shadows?
                                        ANONYMOUS.


The disappearance of the youth, whose disguise and whose fate have, we
hope, inclined our readers to take some interest in him, will require
some explanation ere we proceed with the other personages of the story,
and we shall set about giving it accordingly.

When Augustine was consigned to his cell for the second time on the
preceding evening, both the monk and the young Knight of Valence had
seen the key turned upon him, and had heard him secure the door in the
inside with the bolt which had been put on at his request by sister
Ursula, in whose affections the youth of Augustine, his extreme
handsomeness, and, above all, his indisposition of body and his
melancholy of mind, had gained him considerable interest.

So soon, accordingly, as Augustine re-entered his apartment, he was
greeted in a whisper by the sister, who, during the interval of his
absence, had contrived to slip into the cell, and having tappiced
herself behind the little bed, came out with great appearance of joy,
to greet the return of the youth. The number of little attentions, the
disposal of holly boughs, and such other evergreens as the season
permitted, showed the anxiety of the holy sisters to decorate the
chamber of their guest, and the greetings of sister Ursula expressed
the same friendly interest, at the same time intimating that she was
already in some degree in possession of the stranger's mystery.

As Augustine and the holy sister were busied in exchange of confidence,
the extraordinary difference between, their countenances and their
persons must have struck any one who might have been accidentally a
witness of their interview. The dark pilgrim's robe of the disguised
female was not a stronger contrast to the white woollen garment worn by
the votaress of Saint Bride, than the visage of the nun, seamed with
many a ghastly scar, and the light of one of her eyes extinguished for
ever, causing it to roll a sightless luminary in her head, was to the
beautiful countenance of Augustine, now bent with a confidential, and
even affectionate look, upon the extraordinary features of her
companion.

"You know," said the supposed Augustine, "the principal part of my
story; can you, or will you, lend me your assistance? If not, my
dearest sister, you must consent to witness my death, rather than my
shame. Yes, sister Ursula, I will not be pointed at by the finger of
scorn, as the thoughtless maiden who sacrificed so much for a young
man, of whose attachment she was not so well assured as she ought to
have been. I will not be dragged before De Walton, for the purpose of
being compelled, by threats of torture, to declare myself the female in
honour of whom he holds the Dangerous Castle. No doubt, he might be
glad to give his hand in wedlock to a damsel whose dowry is so ample;
but who can tell whether he will regard me with that respect which
every woman would wish to command, or pardon that boldness of which I
have been guilty, even though its consequences have been in his own
favour?"

"Nay, my darling daughter," answered the nun, "comfort yourself; for in
all I can aid you, be assured I will. My means are somewhat more than
my present situation may express, and, be assured, they shall be tried
to the uttermost. Methinks, I still hear that lay which you sung to the
other sisters and myself, although I alone, touched by feelings kindred
to yours, had the address to comprehend that it told your own tale."

"I am yet surprised," said Augustine, speaking beneath her breath, "how
I had the boldness to sing in your ears the lay, which, in fact, was
the history of my disgrace."

"Alas! that you will say so," returned the nun; "there was not a word
but what resembled those tales of love and of high-spirited daring
which the best minstrels love to celebrate, and the noblest knights and
maidens weep at once and smile to hear. The Lady Augusta of Berkely, a
great heiress, according to the world, both in land and movable goods,
becomes the King's ward by the death of her parents; and thus is on the
point of being given away in marriage to a minion of the King of
England, whom in these Scottish valleys, we scruple not to call a
peremptory tyrant."

"I must not say so, my sister," said the pilgrim; "and yet, true it is,
that the cousin of the obscure parasite Gaviston, on whom the king
wished to confer my poor hand, was neither by birth, merit, nor
circumstance, worthy of such an alliance. Meantime, I heard of the fame
of Sir John de Walton; and I heard of it not with the less interest
that his feats of chivalry were said to adorn a knight, who, rich in
everything else, was poor in worldly goods, and in the smiles of
fortune. I saw this Sir John de Walton, and I acknowledge that a
thought, which had already intruded itself on my imagination, became,
after this interview, by frequent recurrence, more familiar, and more
welcome to me. Methought that the daughter of a powerful English
family, if she could give away with her hand such wealth as the world
spoke of, would more justly and honourably bestow it in remedying the
errors of fortune in regard to a gallant knight like De Walton, than in
patching the revenues of a beggarly Frenchman, whose only merit was in
being the kinsman of a man who was very generally detested by the whole
kingdom of England, excepting the infatuated monarch himself."

"Nobly designed, my daughter," said the nun; "what more worthy of a
noble heart, possessing riches, beauty, birth, and rank, than to confer
them all upon indigent and chivalrous merit?"

"Such, dearest sister, was my intention," replied Augustine; "but I
have, perhaps, scarce sufficiently explained the manner in which I
meant to proceed. By the advice of a minstrel of our house, the same
who is now prisoner at Douglas, I caused exhibit a large feast upon
Christmas eve, and sent invitations abroad to the young knights of
noble name who were known to spend their leisure in quest of arms and
adventures. When the tables were drawn, and the feast concluded,
Bertram, as had been before devised, was called upon to take his harp.
He sung, receiving from all who were present the attention due to a
minstrel of so much fame. The theme which he chose, was the frequent
capture of this Douglas Castle, or, as the poet termed it, Castle
Dangerous. 'Where are the champions of the renowned Edward the First,'
said the minstrel, 'when the realm of England cannot furnish a man
brave enough, or sufficiently expert in the wars, to defend a miserable
hamlet of the North against the Scottish rebels, who have vowed to
retake it over our soldiers' heads ere the year rolls to an end? Where
are the noble ladies, whose smiles used to give countenance to the
Knights of Saint George's Cross? Alas! the spirit of love and of
chivalry is alike dead amongst us--our knights are limited to petty
enterprises--and our noblest heiresses are given as prizes to
strangers, as if their own country had no one to deserve them.'--Here
stopt the harp; and I shame to say, that I myself, as if moved to
enthusiasm by the song of the minstrel, arose, and taking from my neck
the chain of gold which supported a crucifix of special sanctity, I
made my vow, always under the King's permission, that I would give my
hand, and the inheritance of my fathers, to the good knight, being of
noble birth and lineage, who should keep the Castle of Douglas in the
King of England's name, for a year and a day. I sat down, my dearest
sister, deafened with the jubilee in which my guests expressed their
applause of my supposed patriotism. Yet some degree of pause took place
amidst the young knights, who might reasonably have been supposed ready
to embrace this offer, although at the risk of being encumbered with
Augusta of Berkely."

"Shame on the man," said sister Ursula, "who should think so! Put your
beauty alone, my dearest, into consideration, and a true knight ought
to have embraced the dangers of twenty Castles of Douglas, rather than
let such an invaluable opportunity of gaining your favour be lost."

"It may be that some in reality thought so," said the pilgrim; "but it
was supposed that the king's favour might be lost by those who seemed
too anxious to thwart his royal purpose upon his ward's hand. At any
rate, greatly to my joy, the only person who availed himself of the
offer I had made was Sir John de Walton; and as his acceptance of it
was guarded by a clause, saving and reserving the king's approbation, I
hope he has not suffered any diminution of Edward's favour."

"Assure yourself, noble and high-spirited young lady," replied the nun,
"that there is no fear of thy generous devotion hurting thy lover with
the King of England. Something we hear concerning worldly passages,
even in this remote nook of Saint Bride's cloister; and the report goes
among the English soldiers that their king was indeed offended at your
putting your will in opposition to his own; yet, on the other hand,
this preferred lover, Sir John de Walton, was a man of such extensive
fame, and your offer was so much in the character of better but not
forgotten times, that even a king could not at the beginning of a long
and stubborn war deprive an errant cavalier of his bride, if she should
be duly won by his sword and lance."

"Ah! dearest sister Ursula!" sighed the disguised pilgrim, "but, on the
other hand, how much time must pass by in the siege, by defeating which
that suit must needs be advanced? While I sat in my lonely castle,
tidings came to astound me with the numerous, or rather the constant
dangers, with which my lover was surrounded, until at length, in a
moment I think of madness, I resolved to set out in this masculine
disguise; and having myself with my own eyes seen in what situation I
had placed my knight, I determined to take such measures in respect to
shortening the term of his trial, or otherwise, as a sight of Douglas
Castle, and--why should I deny it?--of Sir John de Walton, might
suggest. Perhaps you, my dearest sister, may not so well understand my
being tempted into flinching from the resolution which I had laid down
for my own honour, and that of my lover; but consider, that my
resolution was the consequence of a moment of excitation, and that the
course which I adopted was the conclusion of a long, wasting, sickening
state of uncertainty, the effect of which was to weaken the nerves
which were once highly strung with love of my country, as I thought;
but in reality, alas! with fond and anxious feelings of a more selfish
description."

"Alas!" said sister Ursula, evincing the strongest symptoms of interest
and compassion, "am I the person, dearest child, whom you suspect of
insensibility to the distresses which are the fruit of true love? Do
you suppose that the air which is breathed within these walls has the
property upon the female heart, of such marvellous fountains as they
say change into stone the substances which are immersed into their
waters? Hear my tale, and judge if it can be thus with one who
possesses my causes of grief. And do not fear for loss of time; we must
let our neighbours at Hazelside be settled for the evening, ere I
furnish you with the means of escape; and you must have a trusty guide,
for whose fidelity I will be responsible, to direct your path through
these woods, and protect you in case of any danger, too likely to occur
in these troublesome times. It will thus be nigh an hour ere you
depart; and sure I am that in no manner can you spend the time better
than in listening to distresses too similar to your own, and flowing
from the source of disappointed affection which you must needs
sympathize with."

The distresses of the Lady Augusta did not prevent her being in some
degree affected, almost ludicrously, with the singular contrast between
the hideous countenance of this victim of the tender passion, and the
cause to which she imputed her sorrows; but it was not a moment for
giving way to a sense of the ridiculous, which would have been in the
highest degree offensive to the sister of Saint Bride, whose good-will
she had so many reasons to conciliate. She readily, therefore,
succeeded in preparing herself to listen to the votary--with an
appearance of sympathy, which might reward that which she had herself
experienced at the hands of sister Ursula; while the unfortunate
recluse, with an agitation which made her ugliness still more
conspicuous, narrated, nearly in a whisper, the following
circumstances:--

"My misfortunes commenced long before I was called sister Ursula, or
secluded as a votaress within these walls. My father was a noble
Norman, who, like many of his countrymen, sought and found fortune at
the court of the King of Scotland. He was endowed with the sheriffdom
of this county, and Maurice de Hattely, or Hautlieu, was numbered among
the wealthy and powerful barons of Scotland. Wherefore should I deny
it, that the daughter of this baron, then called Margaret de Hautlieu,
was also distinguished among the great and fair of the land? It can be
no censurable vanity which provokes me to speak the truth, and unless I
tell it myself, you could hardly suspect what a resemblance I once bore
even to the lovely Lady Augusta of Berkely. About this time broke out
those unfortunate feuds of Bruce and Baliol, which have been so long
the curse of this country. My father, determined in his choice of party
by the arguments of his wealthy kinsmen at the court of Edward,
embraced with passion the faction of the English interest, and became
one of the keenest partisans, at first of John Baliol, and afterwards
of the English monarch. None among the Anglocised-Scottish, as his
party was called, were so zealous as he for the red cross, and no one
was more detested by his countrymen who followed the national standard
of Saint Andrew and the patriot Wallace. Among those soldiers of the
soil, Malcolm Fleming of Biggar was one of the most distinguished by
his noble birth, his high acquirements, and his fame in chivalry. I saw
him; and the ghastly spectre who now addresses you must not be ashamed
to say, that she loved, and was beloved by, one of the handsomest
youths in Scotland. Our attachment was discovered to my father almost
ere we had owned it to each other, and he was furious both against my
lover and myself; he placed me under the charge of a religious woman of
this rule, and I was immured within the house of Saint Bride, where my
father shamed not to announce he would cause me to take the veil by
force, unless I agreed to wed a youth bred at the English court, his
nephew; and, as Heaven had granted him no son, the heir, as he had
resolved, of the house of Hautlieu. I was not long in making my
election. I protested that death should be my choice, rather than any
other husband excepting Malcolm Fleming. Neither was my lover less
faithful; he found means to communicate to me a particular night on
which he proposed to attempt to storm the nunnery of Saint Bride, and
carry me from hence to freedom and the greenwood, of which Wallace was
generally called the king. In an evil hour--an hour I think of
infatuation and witchery--I suffered the abbess to wheedle the secret
out of me, which I might have been sensible would appear more horribly
flagitious to her than to any other woman that breathed; but I had not
taken the vows, and I thought Wallace and Fleming had the same charms
for every body as for me, and the artful woman gave me reason to
believe that her loyalty to Bruce was without a flaw of suspicion, and
she took part in a plot of which my freedom was the object. The abbess
engaged to have the English guards removed to a distance, and in
appearance the troops were withdrawn. Accordingly, in the middle of the
night appointed, the window of my cell, which was two stories from the
ground, was opened without noise; and never were my eyes more gladdened
than, as ready disguised and arrayed for flight, even in a horseman's
dress, like yourself, fairest. Lady Augusta, I saw Malcolm Fleming
spring into the apartment. He rushed towards me; but at the same time
my father with ten of his strongest men filled the room, and cried
their war-cry of Baliol. Blows were instantly dealt on every side. A
form like a giant, however, appeared in the midst of the tumult, and
distinguished himself, even to my half-giddy eye, by the ease with
which he bore down and dispersed those who fought against our freedom.
My father alone offered an opposition which threatened to prove fatal
to him; for Wallace, it was said, could foil any two martial champions
that ever drew sword. Brushing from him the armed men, as a lady would
drive away with her fan a swarm of troublesome flies, he secured me in
one arm, used his other for our mutual protection, and I found myself
in the act of being borne in safety down the ladder by which my
deliverers had ascended from without,--but an evil fate awaited this
attempt.

"My father, whom the Champion of Scotland had spared for my sake, or
rather for Fleming's, gained by his victor's compassion and lenity a
fearful advantage, and made a remorseless use of it. Having only his
left hand to oppose to the maniac attempts of my father, even the
strength of Wallace could not prevent the assailant, with all the
energy of desperation, from throwing down the ladder, on which his
daughter was perched like a dove in the grasp of an eagle. The champion
saw our danger, and exerting his inimitable strength and agility,
cleared himself and me from the ladder, and leaped free of the moat of
the convent, into which we must otherwise have been precipitated. The
Champion of Scotland was saved in the desperate attempt, but I who fell
among a heap of stones and rubbish, I the disobedient daughter,
wellnigh the apostate vestal, waked only from a long bed of sickness,
to find myself the disfigured wretch, which you now see me. I then
learned that Malcolm had escaped from the fray, and shortly after I
heard, with feelings less keen perhaps than they ought to have been,
that my father was slain in one of the endless battles which took place
between the contending factions. If he had lived, I might have
submitted to the completion of my fate; but since he was no more, I
felt that it would be a preferable lot to be a beggar in the streets of
a Scottish village, than, an abbess in this miserable house of Saint
Bride; nor was even that poor object of ambition, on which my father
used to expatiate when desirous of persuading me to enter the monastic
state by milder means than throwing me off the battlements, long open
to me. The old abbess died of a cold caught the evening of the fray;
and the place, which might have been kept open until I was capable of
filling it, was disposed of otherwise, when the English thought fit to
reform, as they termed it, the discipline of the house; and instead of
electing a new abbess, sent hither two or three friendly monks, who
have now the absolute government of the community, and wield it
entirely according to the pleasure of the English. But I, for one, who
have had the honour to be supported by the arms of the Champion of my
country, will not remain here to be commanded by this Abbot Jerome. I
will go forth, nor do I fear to find relations and friends, who will
provide a more fitting place of refuge for Margaret de Hautlieu than
the convent of Saint Bride; you, too, dearest lady, shall obtain your
freedom, and it will be well to leave such information as will make Sir
John de Walton aware of the devotion with which his happy fate has
inspired you."

"It is not, then, your own intention," said the Lady Augusta, "to
return into the world again, and you are about to renounce the lover,
in a union with whom you and he once saw your joint happiness?"

"It is a question, my dearest child," said sister Ursula, "which I dare
not ask myself, and to which I am absolutely uncertain what answer I
should return. I have not taken the final and irrevocable vows; I have
done nothing to alter my situation with regard to Malcolm Fleming. He
also, by the vows plighted in the Chancery of Heaven, is my affianced
bridegroom, nor am I conscious that I less deserve his faith, in any
respect now, than at the moment when it was pledged to me; but, I
confess, dearest lady, that rumours have reached me, which sting me to
the quick; the reports of my wounds and scars are said to have
estranged the knight of my choice. I am now, indeed, poor," she added,
with a sigh, "and I am no longer possessed of those personal charms,
which they say attract the love, and fix the fidelity, of the other
sex. I teach myself, therefore, to think, in my moments of settled
resolution, that all betwixt me and Malcolm Fleming is at an end,
saving good wishes on the part of both towards the other; and yet there
is a sensation in my bosom which whispers, in spite of my reason, that
if I absolutely believed that which I now say, there would be no object
on earth worthy my living for in order to attain it. This insinuating
prepossession whispers, to my secret soul, and in very opposition to my
reason and understanding, that Malcolm Fleming, who could pledge his
all upon the service of his country, is incapable of nourishing the
versatile affection of an ordinary, a coarse, or a venal character.
Methinks, were the difference upon his part instead of mine, he would
not lose his interest in my eyes, because he was seamed with honourable
scars, obtained in asserting the freedom of his choice, but that such
wounds would, in my opinion, add to his merit, whatever they took away
from his personal comeliness. Ideas rise on my soul, as if Malcolm and
Margaret might yet be to each other all that their affections once
anticipated with so much security, and that a change, which took
nothing from the honour and virtue of the beloved person, must rather
add to, than diminish, the charms of the union. Look at me, dearest
Lady Augusta!--look me--if you have courage--full in the face, and tell
me whether I do not rave when my fancy is thus converting mere
possibilities into that which is natural and probable."

The Lady of Berkely, conscious of the necessity, raised her eyes on the
unfortunate nun, afraid of losing her own chance of deliverance by the
mode in which she should conduct herself in this crisis; yet not
willing at the same time to flatter the unfortunate Ursula, with
suggesting ideas for which her own sense told her she could hardly find
any rational grounds. But her imagination, stored with the minstrelsy
of the time, brought back to her recollection the Loathly Lady in "The
marriage of Sir Gawain," and she conducted her reply in the following
manner:--

"You ask me, my dear Lady Margaret, a trying question, which it would
be unfriendly to answer otherwise than sincerely, and most cruel to
answer with too much rashness. It is true, that what is called beauty,
is the first quality on which we of the weaker sex learn to set a
value; we are flattered by the imputation of personal charms, whether
we actually possess them or not; and no doubt we learn to place upon
them a great deal more consequence than in reality is found to belong
to them. Women, however, even, such as are held by their own sex, and
perhaps in secret by themselves, as devoid of all pretensions to
beauty, have been known to become, from their understanding, their
talents, or their accomplishments, the undoubted objects of the warmest
attachment. Wherefore then should you, in the mere rashness of your
apprehension, deem it impossible that your Malcolm Fleming should be
made of that porcelain clay of the earth, which despises the passing
captivations of outward form in comparison to the charms of true
affection, and the excellence of talents and virtue?"

The nun pressed her companion's hand to her bosom, and answered her
with a deep sigh.

"I fear," she said, "you flatter me; and yet in a crisis like this, it
does one good to be flattered, even as cordials, otherwise dangerous to
the constitution, are wisely given to support a patient through a
paroxysm of agony, and enable him to endure at least what they cannot
cure. Answer only one question, and it will be time to drop this
conversation. Could you, sweet lady--you upon whom fortune has bestowed
so many charms--could any argument make you patient under the
irretrievable loss of your personal advantages, with the concomitant
loss, as in my case is most probable, of that lover for whom you have
already done so much?"

The English lady cast her eyes again on her friend, and could not help
shuddering a little at the thought of her own beautiful countenance
being exchanged for the seamed and scarred features of the Lady of
Hautlieu, irregularly lighted by the beams of a single eye.

"Believe me," she said, looking solemnly upwards, "that even in the
case which you suppose, I would not sorrow so much for myself, as I
would for the poor-spirited thoughts of the lover who could leave me
because those transitory charms (which must in any case erelong take
their departure) had fled ere yet the bridal day. It is, however,
concealed by the decrees of Providence, in what manner, or to what
extent, other persons, with whose disposition we are not fully
acquainted, may be affected by such changes. I can only assure you that
my hopes go with yours, and that there is no difficulty which shall
remain in your path in future, if it is in my power to remove
it.--Hark!"--

"It is the signal of our freedom," replied Ursula, giving attention to
something resembling the whoop of the night-owl. "We must prepare to
leave the convent in a few minutes. Have you anything to take with you?"

"Nothing," answered the Lady of Berkely, "except the few valuables,
which I scarce know why I brought with me on my flight hither. This
scroll, which I shall leave behind, gives my faithful minstrel
permission to save himself, by confessing to Sir John de Walton who the
person really is whom he has had within his reach."

"It is strange," said the novice of Saint Bride, "through what
extraordinary labyrinths this Love, this Will-of-the-Wisp, guides his
votaries, Take heed as you descend; this trap-door, carefully
concealed, curiously jointed and oiled, leads to a secret postern,
where I conceive the horses already wait, which will enable us speedily
to bid adieu to Saint Bride's--Heaven's blessing on her, and on her
convent! We can have no advantage from any light, until we are in the
open air."

During this time, sister Ursula, to give her for the last time her
conventual name, exchanged her stole, or loose upper garment, for the
more succinct cloak and hood of a horseman. She led the way through
divers passages, studiously complicated, until the Lady of Berkely,
with throbbing heart, stood in the pale and doubtful moonlight, which
was shining with grey uncertainty upon the walls of the ancient
building. The imitation of an owlet's cry directed them to a
neighbouring large elm, and on approaching it, they were aware of three
horses, held by one, concerning whom they could only see that he was
tall, strong, and accoutred in the dress of a man-at-arms.

"The sooner," he said, "we are gone from this place, Lady Margaret, it
is so much the better. You have only to direct the course which we
shall hold."

Lady Margaret's answer was given beneath her breath; and replied to
with a caution from the guide to ride slowly and silently for the first
quarter of an hour, by which time inhabited places would be left at a
distance.






Great was the astonishment of the young Knight of Valence and the
reverend Father Jerome, when, upon breaking into the cell, they
discovered the youthful pilgrim's absence; and, from the garments which
were left, saw every reason to think that the one-eyed novice, sister
Ursula, had accompanied him in his escape from custody. A thousand
thoughts thronged upon Sir Aymer, how shamefully he had suffered
himself to be outwitted by the artifices of a boy and of a novice. His
reverend companion in error felt no less contrition for having
recommended to the knight a mild exercise of his authority. Father
Jerome had obtained his preferment as abbot upon the faith of his zeal
for the cause of the English monarch, with the affected interest in
which he was at a loss to reconcile his proceedings of the last night.
A hurried enquiry took place, from which little could be learned, save
that the young pilgrim had most certainly gone off with the Lady
Margaret de Hautlieu, an incident at which the females of the convent
expressed surprise, mingled with a great deal of horror; while that of
the males, whom the news soon reached, was qualified with a degree of
wonder, which seemed to be founded upon the very different personal
appearance of the two fugitives.

"Sacred Virgin," said a nun, "who could have conceived the hopeful
votaress, sister Ursula, so lately drowned in tears for her father's
untimely fate, capable of eloping with a boy scarce fourteen years old!"

"And, holy Saint Bride!" said the Abbot Jerome, "what could have made
so handsome a young man lend his arm to assist such a nightmare as
sister Ursula, in the commission of so great an enormity? Certainly he
can neither plead temptation nor seduction, but must have gone, as the
worldly phrase is,--to the devil with a dish-clout."

"I must disperse the soldiers to pursue the fugitives," said De
Valence, "unless this letter, which the pilgrim must have left behind
him, shall contain some explanations respecting our mysterious
prisoner."

After viewing the contents with some surprise, he read aloud,--"The
undersigned, late residing in the house of Saint Bride, do you, father
Jerome, the abbot of said house, to know, that finding you were
disposed to treat me as a prisoner and a spy, in the sanctuary to which
you had received me as a distressed person, I have resolved to use my
natural liberty, with which you have no right to interfere, and
therefore have withdrawn myself from your abbacy. Moreover, finding
that the novice called in your convent sister Ursula (who hath, by
monastic rule and discipline, a fair title to return to the world
unless she is pleased, after a year's novitiate, to profess herself
sister of your order) is determined to use such privilege, I joyfully
take the opportunity of her company in this her lawful resolution, as
being what is in conformity to the law of God, and the precepts of
Saint Bride, which gave you no authority to detain any person in your
convent by force, who hath not taken upon her irrevocably the vows of
the order.

"To you, Sir John de Walton, and Sir Aymer de Valence, knights of
England, commanding the garrison of Douglas Dale, I have only to say,
that you have acted and are acting against me under a mystery, the
solution of which is comprehended in a secret known only to my faithful
minstrel, Bertram of the many Lays, as whose son I have found it
convenient to pass myself. But as I cannot at this time prevail upon
myself personally to discover a secret which cannot well be unfolded
without feelings of shame, I not only give permission to the said
Bertram the minstrel, but I charge and command him that he tell to you
the purpose with which I came originally to the Castle of Douglas. When
this is discovered, it will only remain to express my feelings towards
the two knights, in return for the pain and agony of mind which their
violence and threats of further severities have occasioned me.

"And first respecting Sir Aymer de Valence, I freely and willingly
forgive him for having been involved in a mistake to which I myself led
the way, and I shall at all times be happy to meet with him as an
acquaintance, and never to think farther of his part in these few days'
history, saving as matter of mirth and ridicule.

"But respecting Sir John de Walton, I must request of him to consider
whether his conduct towards me, standing as we at present do towards
each, other, is such as he himself ought to forget or I ought to
forgive; and I trust he will understand me when I tell him, that all
former connexions must henceforth be at an end between him and the
supposed "AUGUSTINE."

"This is madness," said the abbot, when he had read the letter,--"very
midsummer madness; not unfrequently an accompaniment of this
pestilential disease, and I should do well in requiring of those
soldiers who shall first apprehend this youth Augustine, that they
reduce his victuals immediately to water and bread, taking care that
the diet do not exceed in measure what is necessary to sustain nature;
nay, I should be warranted by the learned, did I recommend a sufficient
intermixture of flagellation with belts, stirrup-leathers, or
surcingles, and failing those, with riding-whips, switches, and the
like."

"Hush! my reverend father," said De Valence, "a light begins to break
in upon me. John de Walton, if my suspicions be true, would sooner
expose his own flesh to be hewn from his bones, than have this
Augustine's finger stung by a gnat. Instead of treating this youth as a
madman, I for my own part, will be contented to avow that I myself have
been bewitched and fascinated; and by my honour, if I send out my
attendants in quest of the fugitives, it shall be with the strict
charge, that, when apprehended, they treat them with all respect, and
protect them, if they object to return to this house, to any honourable
place of refuge which they may desire."

"I hope," said the abbot, looking strangely confused, "I shall be first
heard in behalf of the Church concerning this affair of an abducted
nun? You see yourself, Sir Knight, that this scapegrace of a minstrel
avouches neither repentance nor contrition at his share in a matter so
flagitious."

"You shall be secured an opportunity of being fully heard," replied the
knight, "if you shall find at last that you really desire one.
Meantime, I must back, without a moment's delay, to inform Sir John de
Walton of the turn which affairs have taken. Farewell, reverend father.
By my honour we may wish each other joy that we have escaped from a
troublesome charge, which brought as much terror with it as the
phantoms of a fearful dream, and is yet found capable of being
dispelled by a cure as simple as that of awakening the sleeper. But, by
Saint Bride! both churchmen and laymen are bound to sympathise with the
unfortunate Sir John de Walton. I tell thee, father, that if this
letter"--touching the missive with his finger--"is to be construed
literally, as far as respects him, he is the man most to be pitied
betwixt the brink of Solway and the place where we now stand. Suspend
thy curiosity, most worthy churchman, lest there should be more in this
matter than I myself see; so that, while thinking that I have lighted
on the true explanation, I may not have to acknowledge that I have been
again leading you into error. Sound to horse there! Ho?" he called out
from the window of the apartment; "and let the party I brought hither
prepare to scour the woods on their return."

"By my faith!" said Father Jerome, "I am right glad that this young
nut-cracker is going to leave me to my own meditation. I hate when a
young person pretends to understand whatever passes, while his betters
are obliged to confess that it is all a mystery to them. Such an
assumption is like that of the conceited fool, sister Ursula, who
pretended to read with a single eye a manuscript which I myself could
not find intelligible with the assistance of my spectacles."

This might not have quite pleased the young knight, nor was it one of
those truths which the abbot would have chosen to deliver in his
hearing. But the knight had shaken him by the hand, said adieu, and was
already at Hazelside, issuing particular orders to little troops of the
archers and others, and occasionally chiding Thomas Dickson, who, with
a degree of curiosity which the English knight was not very willing to
excuse, had been endeavouring to get some account of the occurrences of
the night.

"Peace, fellow!" he said, "and mind thine own business, being well
assured that the hour will come in which it will require all the
attention thou canst give, leaving others to take care of their own
affairs."

"If I am suspected of any thing," answered Dickson, in a tone rather
dogged and surly than otherwise, "methinks it were but fair to let me
know what accusation is brought against me. I need not tell you that
chivalry prescribes that a knight should not attack an enemy undefied."

"When you are a knight," answered Sir Aymer de Valence, "it will be
time enough for me to reckon with you upon the points of form due to
you by the laws of chivalry. Meanwhile, you had best let me know what
share you have had in playing off the martial phantom which sounded the
rebellious slogan of Douglas in the town of that name?"

"I know nothing of what you speak," answered the goodman of Hazelside.

"See then," said the knight, "that you do not engage yourself in the
affairs of other people, even if your conscience warrants that you are
in no danger from your own."

So saying, he rode off, not waiting any answer. The ideas which filled
his head were to the following purpose.

"I know not how it is, but one mist seems no sooner to clear away than.
we find ourselves engaged in another. I take it for granted that the
disguised damsel is no other than the goddess of Walton's private
idolatry, who has cost him and me so much trouble, and some certain,
degree of misunderstanding during these last weeks. By my honour! this
fair lady is right lavish in the pardon which she has so frankly
bestowed upon me, and if she is willing to be less complaisant to Sir
John de Walton, why then--And what then?--It surely does not infer that
she would receive me into that place in her affections, from which she
has just expelled De Walton? Nor, if she did, could I avail myself of a
change in favour of myself, at the expense of my friend and companion
in arms. It were a folly even to dream of a thing so improbable. But
with respect to the other business, it is worth serious consideration.
Yon sexton seems to have kept company with dead bodies, until he is
unfit for the society of the living; and as to that Dickson of
Hazelside, as they call him, there is no attempt against the English
during these endless wars, in which that man has not been concerned;
had my life depended upon it, I could not have prevented myself from
intimating my suspicions of him, let him take it as he lists." So
saying, the knight spurred his horse, and arriving at Douglas Castle
without farther adventure, demanded in a tone of greater cordiality
than he had of late used, whether he could be admitted to Sir John de
Walton, having something of consequence to report to him. He was
immediately ushered into an apartment, in which the governor was seated
at his solitary breakfast. Considering the terms upon which they had
lately stood, the governor of Douglas Dale was somewhat surprised at
the easy familiarity with which De Valence now approached him.

"Some uncommon news," said Sir John, rather gravely, "have brought me
the honour of Sir Aymer de Valence's company."

"It is," answered Sir Aymer, "what seems of high importance to your
interest, Sir John de Walton, and therefore I were to blame if I lost a
moment in communicating it."

"I shall be proud to profit by your intelligence," said Sir John de
Walton.

"And I too," said the young knight, "am both to lose the credit of
having penetrated a mystery which blinded Sir John de Walton. At the
same time, I do not wish to be thought capable of jesting with you,
which might be the case were I, from misapprehension, to give a false
key to this matter. With your permission, then, we will proceed thus:
We go together to the place of Bertram the minstrel's confinement. I
have in my possession a scroll from the young person who was intrusted
to the care of the Abbot Jerome; it is written in a delicate female
hand, and gives authority to the minstrel to declare the purpose which
brought them to this vale of Douglas."

"It must be as you say," said Sir John de Walton, "although can scarce
see occasion for adding so much form to a mystery which can be
expressed in such small compass."

Accordingly the two knights, the warder leading the way, proceeded to
the dungeon to which the minstrel had been removed.






The doors of the stronghold being undone, displayed a dungeon such as
in those days held victims hopeless of escape, but in which the
ingenious knave of modern times would scarcely have deigned to remain
many hours. The huge rings by which the fetters were soldered together,
and attached to the human body, were, when examined minutely, found to
be clenched together by riveting so very thin, that when rubbed with
corrosive acid, or patiently ground with a bit of sandstone, the hold
of the fetters upon each other might easily be forced asunder, and the
purpose of them entirely frustrated. The locks also, large, and
apparently very strong, were so coarsely made, that an artist of small
ingenuity could easily contrive to get the better of their fastenings
upon the same principle. The daylight found its way to the subterranean
dungeon only at noon, and through a passage which was purposely made
tortuous, so as to exclude the rays of the sun, while it presented no
obstacle to wind or rain. The doctrine that a prisoner was to be
esteemed innocent until he should be found guilty by his peers, was not
understood in those days of brute force, and he was only accommodated
with a lamp or other alleviation of his misery, if his demeanour was
quiet, and he appeared disposed to give his jailor no trouble by
attempting to make his escape. Such a cell of confinement was that of
Bertram, whose moderation of temper and patience had nevertheless
procured for him such mitigations of his fate as the warder could
grant. He was permitted to carry into his cell the old book, in the
perusal of which he found an amusement of his solitude, together with
writing materials, and such other helps towards spending his time as
were consistent with his abode in the bosom of the rock, and the degree
of information with which his minstrel craft had possessed him. He
raised his head from the table as the knights entered, while the
governor observed to the young knight:--

"As you seem to think yourself possessed of the secret of this
prisoner, I leave it to you, Sir Aymer de Valence, to bring it to light
in the manner which you shall judge most expedient. If the man or his
son have suffered unnecessary hardship, it shall be my duty to make
amends--which, I suppose, can be no very important matter."

Bertram looked up, and fixed his eyes full upon the governor, but read
nothing in his looks which indicated his being better acquainted than
before with the secret of his imprisonment. Yet, upon turning his eye
towards Sir Aymer, his countenance evidently lighted up, and the glance
which passed between them was one of intelligence.

"You have my secret, then," said he, "and you know who it is that
passes under the name of Augustine?"

Sir Aymer exchanged with him a look of acquiescence; while the eyes of
the governor glancing wildly from the prisoner to the knight of
Valence, exclaimed,--

"Sir Aymer de Valence, as you are belted knight and Christian man, as
you have honour to preserve on earth, and a soul to rescue after death,
I charge you to tell me the meaning of this mystery! It may be that you
conceive, with truth, that you have subject of complaint against
me;--If so, I will satisfy you as a knight may."

The minstrel spoke at the same moment.

"I charge this knight," he said, "by his vow of chivalry, that he do
not divulge any secret belonging to a person of honour and of
character, unless he has positive assurance that it is done entirely by
that person's own consent."

"Let this note remove your scruples," said Sir Aymer, putting the
scroll into the hands of the minstrel; "and for you, Sir John de
Walton, far from retaining the least feeling of any misunderstanding
which may have existed between us, I am disposed entirely to bury it in
forgetfulness, as having arisen out of a series of mistakes which no
mortal could have comprehended. And do not be offended, my dear Sir
John, when I protest, on my knightly faith, that I pity the pain which
I think this scroll is likely to give you, and that if my utmost
efforts can be of the least service to you in unravelling this tangled
skein, I will contribute them with as much earnestness as ever I did
aught in my life. This faithful minstrel will now see that he can have
no difficulty in yielding up a secret, which I doubt not, but for the
writing I have just put into his hands, he would have continued to keep
with unshaken fidelity."

Sir Aymer now placed in De Walton's hand a note, in which he had, ere
he left Saint Bride's convent, signified his own interpretation, of the
mystery; and the governor had scarcely read the name it contained,
before the same name was pronounced aloud by Bertram, who, at the same
moment, handed to the governor the scroll which he had received from
the Knight of Valence.

The white plume which floated over the knight's cap of maintenance,
which was worn as a headpiece within doors, was not more pale in
complexion than was the knight himself at the unexpected and surprising
information, that the lady who was, in chivalrous phrase, empress of
hia thoughts, and commander of his actions, and to whom, even in less
fantastic times, he must have owed the deepest gratitude for the
generous election which she had made in his favour, was the same person
whom he had threatened with personal violence, and subjected to
hardships and affronts which he would not willingly have bestowed even
upon the meanest of her sex.

Yet Sir John de Walton seemed at first scarcely to comprehend the
numerous ill consequences which might probably follow this unhappy
complication of mistakes. He took the paper from the minstrel's hand,
and while his eye, assisted by the lamp, wandered over the characters
without apparently their conveying any distinct impression to his
understanding, De Valence even became alarmed that he was about to lose
his faculties.

"For Heaven's sake, sir," he said, "be a man, and support with manly
steadiness these unexpected occurrences--I would fain think they will
reach to nothing else--which the wit of man could not have prevented.
This fair lady, I would fain hope, cannot be much hurt or deeply
offended by a train of circumstances, the natural consequence of your
anxiety to discharge perfectly a duty upon which must depend the
accomplishment of all the hopes she had permitted you to entertain. In
God's name, rouse up, sir; let it not be said, that an apprehended
frown of a fair lady hath damped to such a degree the courage of the
boldest knight in England; be what men have called you, 'Walton the
Unwavering;' in Heaven's name, let us at least see that the lady is
indeed offended, before we conclude that she is irreconcilably so. To
whose fault are we to ascribe the source of all these errors? Surely,
with all due respect, to the caprice of the lady herself, which has
engendered such a nest of mistakes. Think of it as a man, and as a
soldier. Suppose that you yourself, or I, desirous of proving the
fidelity of our sentinels, or for any other reason, good or bad,
attempted to enter this Dangerous Castle of Douglas without giving the
password to the warders, would we be entitled to blame those upon duty,
if, not knowing our persons, they manfully refused us entrance, made us
prisoners, and mishandled us while resisting our attempt, in terms of
the orders which we ourselves had imposed upon them? What is there that
makes a difference between such a sentinel and yourself, John de
Walton, in this curious affair, which, by Heaven! would rather form a
gay subject for the minstrelsy of this excellent bard, than the theme
of a tragic lay? Come! look not thus, Sir John de Walton; be angry, if
you will, with the lady who has committed such a piece of folly, or
with me who have rode up and down nearly all night on a fool's errand,
and spoiled my best horse, in absolute uncertainty how I shall get
another till my uncle of Pembroke and I shall be reconciled; or,
lastly, if you desire to be totally absurd in your wrath, direct it
against this worthy minstrel on account of his rare fidelity, and
punish him for that for which he better deserves a chain of gold. Let
passion out, if you will; but chase this desponding gloom from the brow
of a man and a belted knight."

Sir John de Walton made an effort to speak, and succeeded with some
difficulty.

"Aymer de Valence," he said, "in irritating a madman you do but sport
with your own life;" and then remained silent.

"I am glad you can say so much," replied his friend; "for I was not
jesting when I said I would rather that you were at variance with me,
than that you laid the whole blame on yourself. It would be courteous,
I think, to set this minstrel instantly at liberty. Meantime, for his
lady's sake, I will entreat him, in all honour, to be our guest till
the Lady Augusta de Berkely shall do us the same honour, and to assist
us in our search after her place of retirement.--Good minstrel," he
continued, "you hear what I say, and you will not, I suppose, be
surprised, that in all honour and kind usage, you find yourself
detained for a short space in this Castle of Douglas?"

"You seem, Sir Knight," replied the minstrel, "not so much to keep your
eye upon the right of doing what you should, as to possess the might of
doing what you would. I must necessarily be guided by your advice,
since you have the power to make it a command."

"And I trust," continued De Valence, "that when your mistress and you
again meet, we shall have the benefit of your intercession for any
thing which we may have done to displeasure her, considering that the
purpose of our action was exactly the reverse."

"Let me," said Sir John de Walton, "say a single word. I will offer
thee a chain of gold, heavy enough to bear down the weight of these
shackles, as a sign of regret for having condemned thee to suffer so
many indignities."

"Enough said, Sir John," said De Valence; "let us promise no more till
this good minstrel shall see some sign of performance. Follow me this
way, and I will tell thee in private of other tidings, which it is
important that you should know."

So saying, he withdrew De Walton from the dungeon, and sending for the
old knight, Sir Philip de Montenay, already mentioned, who acted as
seneschal of the castle, he commanded that the minstrel should be
enlarged from the dungeon, well looked to in other respects, yet
prohibited, though with every mark of civility, from leaving the castle
without a trusty attendant.

"And now, Sir John de Walton," he said, "methinks you are a little
churlish in not ordering me some breakfast, after I have been all night
engaged in your affairs; and a cup of muscadel would, I think, be no
bad induction to a full consideration of this perplexed matter."

"Thou knowest," answered De Walton, "that thou mayest call for what
thou wilt, provided always thou tellest me, without loss of time, what
else thou knowest respecting the will of the lady, against whom we have
all sinned so grievously--and I, alas, beyond hope of forgiveness!"

"Trust me, I hope," said the Knight of Valence, "the good lady bears me
no malice, as indeed she has expressly renounced any ill-will against
me. The words, you see, are as plain as you yourself may read--'The
lady pardons poor Aymer de Valence, and willingly, for having been
involved in a mistake, to which she herself led the way; she herself
will at all times be happy to meet with him as an acquaintance, and
never to think farther of these few days' history, except as matter of
mirth and ridicule.' So it is expressly written and set down."

"Yes," replied Sir John de Walton, "but see you not that her offending
lover is expressly excluded from the amnesty granted to the lesser
offender? Mark you not the concluding paragraph?" He took the scroll
with a trembling hand, and read with a discomposed voice its closing
words. "It is even so: 'All former connexion must henceforth be at an
end between him and the supposed Augustine.' Explain to me how the
reading of these words is reconcilable to anything but their plain
sense of condemnation and forfeiture of contract, implying destruction
of the hopes of Sir John de Walton?"

"You are somewhat an older man than I, Sir Knight," answered De
Valence, "and I will grant, by far the wiser and more experienced; yet
I will uphold that there is no adopting the interpretation which you
seem to have affixed in your mind to this letter, without supposing the
preliminary, that the fair writer was distracted in her understanding,
--nay, never start, look wildly, or lay your hand on your sword, I do
not affirm this is the case. I say again, that no woman in her senses
would have pardoned a common acquaintance for his behaving to her with
unintentional disrespect and unkindness, during the currency of a
certain masquerade, and, at the same time, sternly and irrevocably
broke off with the lover to whom her troth was plighted, although his
error in joining in the offence was neither grosser nor more protracted
than that of the person indifferent to her love."

"Do not blaspheme," said Sir John do Walton; "and forgive me, if, in
justice to truth and to the angel whom I fear I have forfeited for
ever, I point out to you the difference which a maiden of dignity and
of feeling must make between an offence towards her, committed by an
ordinary acquaintance, and one of precisely the same kind offered by a
person who is bound by the most undeserved preference, by the most
generous benefits, and by every thing which can bind human feeling, to
think and reflect ere he becomes an actor in any case in which it is
possible for her to be concerned."

"Now, by mine honour," said Aymer de Valence, "I am glad to hear thee
make some attempt at reason, although it is but an unreasonable kind of
reason too, since its object is to destroy thine own hopes, and argue
away thine own chance of happiness; but if I have, in the progress of
this affair, borne me sometimes towards thee, as to give not only the
governor, but even the friend, some cause of displeasure, I will make
it up to thee now, John de Walton, by trying to convince thee in spite
of thine own perverse logic. But here comes the muscadel and the
breakfast; wilt thou take some refreshment;--or shall we go on without
the spirit of muscadel?"

"For Heaven's sake," replied De Walton, "do as thou wilt, so thou make
me clear of thy well-intended babble."

"Nay, thou shalt not brawl me out of my powers of argument," said De
Valence, laughing, and helping himself to a brimming cup of wine; "if
thou acknowledgest thyself conquered, I am contented to give the
victory to the inspiring strength of the jovial liquor."

"Do as thou listest," said De Walton, "but make an end of an argument
which thou canst not comprehend."

"I deny the charge," answered the younger knight, wiping his lips,
after having finished his draught; "and listen, Walton the Warlike, to
a chapter in the history of woman, in which thou art more unskilled
than I would wish thee to be. Thou canst not deny that, be it right or
wrong, the lady Augusta hath ventured more forward with you than is
usual upon the sea of affection; she boldly made thee her choice, while
thou wert as yet known to her only as a flower of English
chivalry,--faith, and I respect her for her frankness--but it was a
choice, which the more cold of her own sex might perhaps claim occasion
to term rash and precipitate.--Nay, be not, I pray thee, offended--I am
far from thinking or saying so; on the contrary, I will uphold with my
lance, her selection of John de Walton against the minions of a court,
to be a wise and generous choice, and her own behaviour as alike candid
and noble. But she herself is not unlikely to dread unjust
misconstruction; a fear of which may not improbably induce her, upon
any occasion, to seize some opportunity of showing an unwonted and
unusual rigour towards her lover, in order to balance her having
extended towards him, in the beginning of their intercourse, somewhat
of an unusual degree of frank encouragement. Nay, it might be easy for
her lover so far to take part against himself, by arguing as thou dost,
when out of thy senses, as to make it difficult for her to withdraw
from an argument which he himself was foolish enough to strengthen; and
thus, like a maiden too soon taken at her first nay-say, she shall
perhaps be allowed no opportunity of bearing herself according to her
real feelings, or retracting a sentence issued with consent of the
party whose hopes it destroys."

"I have heard thee, De Valence," answered the governor of Douglas Dale;
"nor is it difficult for me to admit, that these thy lessons may serve
as a chart to many a female heart, but not to that of Augusta de
Berkely. By my life, I say I would much sooner be deprived of the merit
of those few deeds of chivalry which thou sayest have procured for me
such enviable distinction, than I would act upon them with the
insolence, as if I said that my place in the lady's bosom was too
firmly fixed to be shaken even by the success of a worthier man, or by
my own gross failure in respect to the object of my attachment. No,
herself alone shall have power to persuade me that even goodness equal
to that of an interceding saint will restore me to the place in her
affections which I have most unworthily forfeited, by a stupidity only
to be compared to that of brutes."

"If you are so minded," said Aymer De Valence, "I have only one word
more--forgive me if I speak it peremptorily--the lady, as you say, and
say truly, must be the final arbitress in this question. My arguments
do not extend to insisting that you should claim her hand, whether she
herself will or no; but, to learn her determination, it is necessary
that you should find out where she is, of which I am unfortunately not
able to inform you."

"How! what mean you!" exclaimed the governor, who now only began to
comprehend the extent of his misfortune; "whither hath she fled? or
with whom?"

"She is fled, for what I know," said De Valence, "in search of a more
enterprising lover than one who is so willing to interpret every air of
frost as a killing blight to his hopes; perhaps she seeks the Black
Douglas, or some such hero of the Thistle, to reward with her lands,
her lordships, and beauty, those virtues of enterprise and courage, of
which John de Walton was at one time thought possessed. But, seriously,
events are passing around us of strange import. I saw enough last
night, on my way to Saint Bride's, to make me suspicious of every one.
I sent to you as a prisoner the old sexton of the church of Douglas. I
found him contumacious as to some enquiries which I thought it proper
to prosecute; but of this more at another time. The escape of this lady
adds greatly to the difficulties which encircle this devoted castle."

"Aymer de Valence," replied De Walton, in a solemn and animated tone,
"Douglas Castle shall be defended, as we have hitherto been able, with
the aid of heaven, to spread from its battlements the broad banner of
St. George. Come of me what lists during my life, I will die the
faithful lover of Augusta de Berkely, even although I no longer live as
her chosen knight. There are cloisters and hermitages"--

"Ay, marry are there," replied Sir Aymer; "and girdles of hemp,
moreover, and beads of oak; but all these we omit in our reckonings,
till we discover where the Lady Augusta is, and what she purposes to do
in this matter."

"You say well," replied De Walton; "let us hold counsel together by
what means we shall, if possible, discover the lady's too hasty
retreat, by which she has done me great wrong; I mean, if she supposed
her commands would not have been fully obeyed, had she honoured with
them the governor of Douglas Dale, or any who are under his command."

"Now," replied De Valence, "you again speak like a true son of
chivalry. With your permission I would summon this minstrel to our
presence. His fidelity to his mistress has been remarkable; and, as
matters stand now, we must take instant measures for tracing the place
of her retreat."





     The way is long, my children, long and rough
     The moors are dreary, and the woods are dark;
     But he that creeps from cradle on to grave,
     Unskill'd save in the velvet course of fortune,
     Hath miss'd the discipline of noble hearts.
                                            OLD PLAY.


It was yet early in the day, when, after the Governor and De Valence
had again summoned Bertram to their councils, the garrison of Douglas
was mustered, and a number of small parties, in addition to those
already despatched by De Valence from Hazelside, were sent out to scour
the woods in pursuit of the fugitives, with strict injunctions to treat
them, if overtaken, with the utmost respect, and to obey their
commands, keeping an eye, however, on the place where they might take
refuge. To facilitate this result, some who were men of discretion were
intrusted with the secret who the supposed pilgrim and the fugitive nun
really were. The whole ground, whether forest or moorland, within many
miles of Douglas Castle, was covered and traversed by parties, whose
anxiety to detect the fugitives was equal to the reward for their safe
recovery, liberally offered by De Walton and De Valence. They spared
not, meantime, to make such enquiries in all directions as might bring
to light any machinations of the Scottish insurgents which might be on
foot in those wild districts, of which, as we have said before, De
Valence, in particular, entertained strong suspicions. Their
instructions were, in case of finding such, to proceed against the
persons engaged, by arrest and otherwise, in the most rigorous manner,
such as had been commanded by De Walton himself at the time when the
Black Douglas and his accomplices had been the principal objects of his
wakeful suspicions. These various detachments had greatly reduced the
strength of the garrison; yet, although numerous, alert, and despatched
in every direction, they had not the fortune either to fall on the
trace of the Lady of Berkely, or to encounter any party whatever of the
insurgent Scottish.

Meanwhile, our fugitives had, as we have seen, set out from the convent
of St. Bride under the guidance of a cavalier, of whom the Lady Augusta
knew nothing, save that he was to guide their steps in a direction
where they would not be exposed to the risk of being overtaken. At
length Margaret de Hautlieu herself spoke upon the subject.

"You have made no enquiry," she said, "Lady Augusta, whither you are
travelling, or under whose charge, although methinks it should much
concern you to know."

"Is it not enough for me to be aware," answered Lady Augusta, "that I
am travelling, kind sister, under the protection of one to whom you
yourself trust as to a friend; and why need I be anxious for any
farther assurance of my safety?"

"Simply," said Margaret, de Hautlieu, "because the persons with whom,
from national as well as personal circumstances, I stand connected, are
perhaps not exactly the protectors to whom you, lady, can with such
perfect safety intrust yourself."

"In what sense," said the Lady Augusta, "do you use these words?"

"Because," replied Margaret de Hautlieu, "the Bruce, the Douglas,
Malcolm Fleming, and others of that party, although they are incapable
of abusing such an advantage to any dishonourable purpose, might
nevertheless, under a strong temptation, consider you as an hostage
thrown into their hands by Providence, through whom they might meditate
the possibility of gaining some benefit to their dispersed and
dispirited party."

"They might make me," answered the Lady Augusta, "the subject of such a
treaty, when I was dead, but, believe me, never while I drew vital
breath. Believe me also that, with whatever pain, shame, or agony, I
would again deliver myself up to the power of De Walton, yes, I would
rather put myself in his hands--what do I say? _his_!--I would rather
surrender myself to the meanest archer of my native country, than
combine with its foes to work mischief to merry England---my own
England--that country which is the envy of every other country, and the
pride of all who can term themselves her natives!"

"I thought that your choice might prove so," said Lady Margaret; "and
since you have honoured me with your confidence, gladly would I provide
for your liberty by placing you as nearly in the situation which you
yourself desire, as my poor means have the power of accomplishing. In
half an hour we shall be in danger of being taken by the English
parties, which will be instantly dispersed in every direction in quest
of us. Now, take notice, lady, I know a place in which I can take
refuge with my friends and countrymen, those gallant Scots, who have
never even in this dishonoured age bent the knee to Baal. For their
honour, their nicety of honour, I could in other days have answered
with my own; but of late, I am bound to tell you, they have been put to
those trials by which the most generous affections may be soured, and
driven to a species of frenzy, the more wild that it is founded
originally on the noblest feelings. A person who feels himself deprived
of his natural birthright, denounced, exposed to confiscation and
death, because he avouches the rights of his king, the cause of his
country, ceases on his part to be nice or precise in estimating the
degree of retaliation which it is lawful for him to exercise in the
requital of such injuries; and, believe me, bitterly should I lament
having guided you into a situation which you might consider afflicting
or degrading."

"In a word then," said the English lady, "what is it you apprehend I am
like to suffer at the hands of your friends, whom I must be excused for
terming rebels?"

"If," said the sister Ursula, "_your_ friends, whom I should term
oppressors and tyrants, take our land and our lives, seize our castles,
and confiscate our property, you must confess, that the rough laws of
war indulge _mine_ with the privilege of retaliation. There can be no
fear, that such men, under any circumstances, would ever exercise
cruelty or insult upon a lady of your rank; but it is another thing to
calculate that they will abstain from such means of extorting advantage
from your captivity as are common in warfare. You would not, I think,
wish to be delivered up to the English, on consideration of Sir John de
Walton surrendering the Castle of Douglas to its natural lord; yet,
were you in the hands of the Bruce or Douglas, although I can answer
for your being treated with all the respect which they have the means
of showing, yet I own, their putting you at such a ransom might be by
no means unlikely."

"I would sooner die," said the Lady Berkely, "than have my name mixed
up in a treaty so disgraceful; and De Walton's reply to it would, I am
certain, be to strike the head from the messenger, and throw it from
the highest tower of Douglas Castle."

"Where, then, lady, would you now go," said sister Ursula, "were the
choice in your power?"

"To my own castle," answered Lady Augusta, "where, if necessary, I
could be defended even against the king himself, until I could place at
least my person under the protection of the Church."

"In that case," replied Margaret de Hautlieu, "my power of rendering
you assistance is only precarious, yet it comprehends a choice which I
will willingly submit to your decision, notwithstanding I thereby
subject the secrets of my friends to some risk of being discovered and
frustrated. But the confidence which you have placed in me, imposes on
me the necessity of committing to you a like trust. It rests with you,
whether you will proceed with me to the secret rendezvous of the
Douglas and his friends, which I may be blamed for making known, and
there take your chance of the reception which you may encounter, since
I cannot warrant you of any thing save honourable treatment, so far as
your person is concerned; or if you should think this too hazardous,
make the best of your way at once for the Border; in which last case I
will proceed as far as I can with you towards the English line, and
then leave you to pursue your journey, and to obtain a guard and a
conductor among your own countrymen. Meantime, it will be well for me
if I escape being taken, since the abbot would not shrink at inflicting
upon me the death due to an apostate nun."

"Such cruelty, my sister, could hardly be inflicted upon one who had
never taken the religious vows, and who still, according to the laws of
the Church, had a right to make a choice between the world and the
veil."

"Such choice as they gave their gallant victims," said Lady Margaret,
"who have fallen into English hands during these merciless wars,--such
choice as they gave to Wallace, the Champion of Scotland,--such as they
gave to Hay, the gentle and the free,--to Sommerville, the flower of
chivalry,--and to Athol, the blood relation of King Edward himself--all
of whom were as much traitors, under which name they were executed, as
Margaret de Hautlieu is an apostate nun, and subject to the rule of the
cloister."

She spoke with some eagerness, for she felt as if the English lady
imputed to her more coldness than she was, in such doubtful
circumstances, conscious of manifesting.

"And after all," she proceeded, "you, Lady Augusta de Berkely, what do
you venture, if you run the risk of falling into the hands of your
lover? What dreadful risk do you incur? You need not, methinks, fear
being immured between four walls, with a basket of bread and a cruise
of water, which, were I seized, would be the only support allowed to me
for the short space that my life would be prolonged. Nay, even were you
to be betrayed to the rebel Scots, as you call them, a captivity among
the hills, sweetened by the hope of deliverance, and rendered tolerable
by all the alleviations which the circumstances of your captors allowed
them the means of supplying, were not, I think, a lot so very hard to
endure."

"Nevertheless," answered the Lady of Berkely, "frightful enough it must
have appeared to me, since, to fly from such, I threw myself upon your
guidance."

"And, whatever you think or suspect," answered the novice, "I am as
true to you as ever was one maiden to another; and as sure as ever
sister Ursula was true to her vows, although they were never completed,
so will I be faithful to your secret, even at the risk of betraying my
own."

"Hearken, lady!" she said, suddenly pausing, "do you hear that?"

The sound to which she alluded was the same imitation of the cry of an
owlet, which the lady had before heard under the walls of the convent.

"These sounds," said Margaret de Hautlieu, "announce that one is near,
more able than I am to direct us in this matter. I must go forward and
speak with him; and this man, our guide, will remain by you for a
little space; nor, when he quits your bridle, need you wait for any
other signal, but ride forward on the woodland path, and obey the
advice and directions which will be given you."

"Stay! stay! sister Ursula!" cried the Lady de Berkely--"abandon me not
in this moment of uncertainty and distress!"

"It must be, for the sake of both," returned Margaret de Hautlieu. "I
also am in uncertainty--I also am in distress--and patience and
obedience are the only virtues which can save us both."

So saying, she struck her horse with the riding rod, and moving briskly
forward, disappeared among the tangled boughs of a thicket. The Lady of
Berkely would have followed her companion, but the cavalier who
attended them laid a strong hand upon the bridle of her palfrey, with a
look which implied that he would not permit her to proceed in that
direction. Terrified, therefore, though she could not exactly state a
reason why, the Lady of Berkely remained with her eyes fixed upon the
thicket, instinctively, as it were, expecting to see a band of English
archers, or rugged Scottish insurgents, issue from its tangled skirts,
and doubtful which she should have most considered as the objects of
her terror. In the distress of her uncertainty, she again attempted to
move forward, but the stern check which her attendant again bestowed
upon her bridle, proved sufficiently that in restraining her wishes,
the stranger was not likely to spare the strength which he certainly
possessed. At length, after some ten minutes had elapsed, the cavalier
withdrew his hand from her bridle, and pointing with his lance towards
the thicket, through which there winded a narrow, scarce visible path,
seemed to intimate to the lady that her road lay in that direction, and
that he would no longer prevent her following it.

"Do you not go with me?" said the lady, who, having been accustomed to
this man's company since they left the convent, had by degrees come to
look upon him as a sort of protector. He, however, gravely shook his
head, as if to excuse complying with a request, which it was not in his
power to grant; and turning his steed in a different direction, retired
at a pace which soon carried him from her sight. She had then no
alternative but to take the path of the thicket, which had been
followed by Margaret de Hautlieu, nor did she pursue it long before
coming in sight of a singular spectacle. The trees grew wider as the
lady advanced, and when she entered the thicket, she perceived that,
though hedged in as it were by an enclosure of copsewood, it was in the
interior altogether occupied by a few of the magnificent trees, such as
seemed to have been the ancestors of the forest, and which, though few
in number, were sufficient to overshade all the unoccupied ground, by
the great extent of their complicated branches. Beneath one of these
lay stretched something of a grey colour, which, as it drew itself
together, exhibited the figure of a man sheathed in armour, but
strangely accoutred, and in a manner so bizarre, as to indicate some of
the wild fancies peculiar to the knights of that period. His armour was
ingeniously painted, so as to represent a skeleton; the ribs being
constituted by the corselet and its back-piece. The shield represented
an owl with its wings spread, a device which was repeated upon the
helmet, which appeared to be completely covered by an image of the same
bird of ill omen. But that which was particularly calculated to excite
surprise in the spectator, was the great height and thinness of the
figure, which, as it arose from the ground, and placed itself in an
erect posture, seemed rather to resemble an apparition in the act of
extricating itself from the grave, than that of an ordinary man rising
upon his feet. The horse, too, upon which the lady rode, started back
and snorted, either at the sudden change of posture of this ghastly
specimen of chivalry, or disagreeably affected by some odour which
accompanied his presence. The lady herself manifested some alarm, for
although she did not utterly believe she was in the presence of a super
natural being, yet, among all the strange half-frantic disguises of
chivalry this was assuredly the most uncouth which she had ever seen;
and, considering how often the knights of the period pushed their
dreamy fancies to the borders of insanity, it seemed at best no very
safe adventure to meet? one accoutred in the emblems of the King of
Terrors himself, alone, and in the midst of a wild forest. Be the
knight's character and purposes what they might, she resolved, however,
to accost him in the language and manner observed in romances upon such
occasions, in the hope even that if he were a madman he might prove a
peaceable one, and accessible to civility.

"Sir Knight," she said, in as firm a tone as she could assume, "right
sorry am I, if, by my hasty approach, I have disturbed your solitary
meditations. My horse, sensible I think of the presence of yours,
brought me hither, without my being aware whom or what I was to
encounter."

"I am one," answered the stranger, in a solemn tone, "whom few men seek
to meet, till the time comes that they can avoid me no longer."

"You speak, Sir Knight," replied the Lady de Berkely, "according to the
dismal character of which it has pleased you to assume the distinction.
May I appeal to one whose exterior is so formidable, for the purpose of
requesting some directions to guide me through this wild wood; as, for
instance, what is the name of the nearest castle, town, or hostelry,
and by what course I am best likely to reach such?"

"It is a singular audacity," answered the Knight of the Tomb, "that
would enter into conversation with him who is termed the Inexorable,
the Unsparing, and the Pitiless, whom even the most miserable forbears
to call to his assistance, lest his prayers should be too soon
answered."

"Sir Knight," replied the Lady Augusta, "the character which you have
assumed, unquestionably for good reasons, dictates to you a peculiar
course of speech; but although your part is a sad one, it does not, I
should suppose, render it necessary for you to refuse those acts of
civility to which you must have bound yourself in taking the high vows
of chivalry."

"If you will trust to my guidance," replied the ghastly figure, "there
is only one condition upon which I can grant you the information which
you require; and that is, that you follow my footsteps without any
questions asked as to the tendency of our journey."

"I suppose I must submit to your conditions," she answered, "if you are
indeed pleased to take upon yourself the task of being my guide. In my
heart I conceive you to be one of the unhappy gentlemen of Scotland,
who are now in arms, as they say, for the defence of their liberties. A
rash undertaking has brought me within the sphere of your influence,
and now the only favour I have to request of you, against whom I never
did, nor planned any evil, is the guidance which your knowledge of the
country permits you easily to afford me in my way to the frontiers of
England. Believe that what I may see of your haunts or of your
practices, shall be to me things invisible, as if they were actually
concealed by the sepulchre itself, of the king of which it has pleased
you to assume the attributes; and if a sum of money, enough to be the
ransom of a wealthy earl, will purchase such a favour at need, such a
ransom will be frankly paid, and with as much fidelity as ever it was
rendered by a prisoner to the knight by whom he was taken. Do not
reject me, princely Bruce--noble Douglas--if indeed it is to either of
these that I address myself in this my last extremity--men speak of
both as fearful enemies, but generous knights and faithful friends. Let
me entreat you to remember how much you would wish your own friends and
connexions to meet with compassion under similar circumstances, at the
hands of the knights of England."

"And have they done so?" replied the Knight, in a voice more gloomy
than before, "or do you act wisely, while imploring the protection of
one whom you believe to be a true Scottish knight, for no other reason
than the extreme and extravagant misery of his appearance?--is it, I
say, well or wise to remind him of the mode in which the lords of
England have treated the lovely maidens and the high-born dames of
Scotland? Have not their prison cages been suspended from the
battlements of castles, that their captivity might be kept in view of
every base burgher, who should desire to look upon the miseries of the
noblest peeresses, yea, even the Queen of Scotland? [Footnote: The
Queen of Robert the Bruce, and the Countess of Buchan, by whom, as one
of Macduff's descent, he was crowned at Scone, were secured in the
manner described.] Is this a recollection which can inspire a Scottish
knight with compassion towards an English lady? or is it a thought
which can do aught but swell the deeply sworn hatred of Edward
Plantagenet, the author of these evils, that boils in every drop of
Scottish blood which still feels the throb of life? No;--it is all you
can expect, if, cold and pitiless as the sepulchre I represent, I leave
you unassisted in the helpless condition in which you describe yourself
to be."

"You will not be so inhuman," replied the lady; "in doing so you must
surrender every right to honest fame, which you have won either by
sword or lance. You must surrender every pretence to that justice which
affects the merit of supporting the weak against the strong. You must
make it your principle to avenge the wrongs and tyranny of Edward
Plantagenet upon the dames and damosels of England, who have neither
access to his councils, nor perhaps give him their approbation in his
wars against Scotland."

"It would not then," said the Knight of the Sepulchre, "induce you to
depart from your request, should I tell you the evils to which you
would subject yourself should we fall into the hands of the English
troops, and should they find you under such ill-omened protection as my
own?"

"Be assured," said the lady, "the consideration of such an event does
not in the least shake my resolution, or desire of confiding in your
protection. You may probably know who I am, and may judge how far even,
Edward would hold himself entitled to extend punishment towards me."

"How am I to know you," replied the ghastly cavalier, "or your
circumstances? They must be extraordinary indeed, if they could form a
check, either of justice or humanity, upon the revengeful feelings of
Edward. All who know him are well assured that it is no ordinary motive
that will induce him to depart from the indulgence of his evil temper.
But be it as it may, you, lady, if a lady you be, throw yourself as a
burden upon me, and I must discharge myself of my trust as I best may;
for this purpose you must be guided implicitly by my directions, which
will be given after the fashion of those of the spiritual world, being
intimations, rather than detailed instructions for your conduct, and
expressed rather by commands, than, by any reason or argument. In this
way it is possible that I may be of service to you; in any other case,
it is most likely that I may fail you at need, and melt from your side
like a phantom which dreads the approach of day."

"You cannot be so cruel!" answered the lady. "A gentleman, a knight,
and a nobleman--and I persuade myself I speak to all--hath duties which
he cannot abandon."

"He has, I grant it, and they are most sacred to me," answered the
Spectral Knight; "but I have also duties whose obligations are doubly
binding, and to which I must sacrifice those which would otherwise lead
me to devote myself to your rescue. The only question is whether you
feel inclined to accept my protection on the limited terms on which
alone I can extend it, or whether you deem it better that each go their
own way, and limit themselves to their own resources, and trust the
rest to Providence?" "Alas!" replied the lady, "beset and hard pressed
as I am, to ask me to form a resolution for myself, is like calling on
the wretch in the act of falling from a precipice, to form a calm
judgment by what twig he may best gain the chance of breaking his fall.
His answer must necessarily be, that he will cling to that which he can
easiest lay hold of, and trust the rest to Providence. I accept
therefore your offer of protection in the modified way you are pleased
to limit it, and I put my faith in Heaven and in you. To aid me
effectually, however, you must know my name and my circumstances."

"All these," answered the Knight of the Sepulchre, "have already been
told me by your late companion; for deem not, young lady, that either
beauty, rank, extended domains, unlimited wealth, or the highest
accomplishments, can weigh any thing in the consideration of him who
wears the trappings of the tomb, and whose affections and desires are
long buried in the charnel-house."

"May your faith," said the Lady Augusta de Berkely, "be as steady as
your words appear severe, and I submit to your guidance, without the
least doubt or fear that it will prove otherwise than as I venture to
hope."






Like the dog following its master, when engaged in training him to the
sport in which he desires he should excel, the Lady Augusta felt
herself occasionally treated with a severity, calculated to impress
upon her the most implicit obedience and attention to the Knight of the
Tomb, in whom she had speedily persuaded herself she saw a principal
man among the retainers of Douglas, if not James of Douglas himself.
Still, however, the ideas which the lady had formed of the redoubted
Douglas, were those of a knight highly accomplished in the duties of
chivalry, devoted in particular to the service of the fair sex, and
altogether unlike the personage with whom she found herself so
strangely united, or rather for the present enthralled to.
Nevertheless, when, as if to abridge farther communication, he turned
short into one of the mazes of the wood, and seemed to adopt a pace,
which, from the nature of the ground, the horse on which the Lady
Augusta was mounted had difficulty to keep up with, she followed him
with the alarm and speed of the young spaniel, which from fear rather
than fondness, endeavours to keep up with the track of its severe
master. The simile, it is true, is not a very polite one, nor entirely
becoming an age, when women were worshipped with a certain degree of
devotion; but such circumstances as the present were also rare, and the
Lady Augusta de Berkely could not but persuade herself that the
terrible champion, whose name had been so long the theme of her
anxiety, and the terror indeed of the whole country, might be able,
some way or other, to accomplish her deliverance. She, therefore,
exerted herself to the utmost, so as to keep pace with the phantom-like
apparition, and followed the knight, as the evening shadow keeps watch
upon the belated rustic.

As the lady obviously suffered under the degree of exertion necessary
to keep her palfrey from stumbling in these steep and broken paths, the
Knight of the Tomb slackened his pace, looked anxiously around him, and
muttered apparently to himself, though probably intended for his
companion's ear, "There is no occasion for so much haste."

He proceeded at a slower rate, until they seemed to be on the brink of
a ravine, being one of many irregularities on the surface of the
ground, effected by the sudden torrents peculiar to that country, and
which, winding among the trees and copse-wood, formed, as it were, a
net of places of concealment, opening into each other, so that there
was perhaps no place in the world so fit for the purpose of ambuscade.
The spot where the borderer Turnbull had made his escape at the hunting
match, was one specimen of this broken country, and perhaps connected
itself with the various thickets and passes through which the knight
and pilgrim occasionally seemed to take their way, though that ravine
was at a considerable distance from their present route.

Meanwhile the knight led the way, as if rather with the purpose of
bewildering the Lady Augusta amidst these interminable woods, than
following any exact or fixed path. Here they ascended, and anon
appeared to descend in the same direction, finding only boundless
wildernesses, and varied combinations of tangled woodland scenery. Such
part of the country as seemed arable, the knight appeared carefully to
avoid; yet he could not direct his course with so much certainty but
that he occasionally crossed the path of inhabitants and cultivators,
who showed a consciousness of so singular a presence, but never as the
lady observed evinced any symptoms of recognition. The inference was
obvious, that the spectre knight was known in the country, and that he
possessed adherents or accomplices there, who were at least so far his
friends, as to avoid giving any alarm, which might be the means of his
discovery. The well-imitated cry of the night-owl, too frequent a guest
in the wilderness that its call should be a subject of surprise, seemed
to be a signal generally understood among them; for it was heard in
different parts of the wood, and the Lady Augusta, experienced in such
journeys by her former travels under the guidance of the minstrel
Bertram, was led to observe, that on hearing such wild notes, her guide
changed the direction of his course, and betook himself to paths which
led through deeper wilds, and more impenetrable thickets. This happened
so often, that a new alarm came upon the unfortunate pilgrim, which
suggested other motives of terror. Was she not the confidant, and
almost the tool of some artful design, laid with a view to an extensive
operation, which was destined to terminate, as the efforts of Douglas
had before done, in the surprise of his hereditary castle, the massacre
of the English garrison--and finally in the dishonour and death of that
Sir John de Walton, upon whose fate she had long believed, or taught
herself to believe, that her own was dependent?

It no sooner flashed across the mind of the Lady Augusta that she was
engaged in some such conspiracy with a Scottish insurgent, than she
shuddered at the consequences of the dark transactions in which she had
now become involved, and which appeared to have a tendency so very
different from what she had at first apprehended.

The hours of the morning of this remarkable day, being that of Palm
Sunday, were thus drawn out in wandering from place to place; while the
Lady de Berkely occasionally interposed by petitions for liberty, which
she endeavoured to express in the most moving and pathetic manner, and
by offers of wealth and treasures, to which no answer whatever was
returned by her strange guide.

At length, as if worn out by his captive's importunity, the knight,
coming close up to the bridle-rein of the Lady Augusta, said in a
solemn tone--

"I am, as you may well believe, none of those knights who roam through
wood and wild, seeking adventures, by which I may obtain grace in the
eyes of a fair lady: Yet will I to a certain degree grant the request
which thou dost solicit so anxiously, and the arbitration of thy fate
shall depend upon the pleasure of him to whose will thou hast expressed
thyself ready to submit thine own. I will, on our arrival at the place
of our destination, which is now at hand, write to Sir John de Walton,
and send my letter, together with thy fair self, by a special
messenger. He will, no doubt, speedily attend our summons, and thou
shalt thyself be satisfied, that even he who has as yet appeared deaf
to entreaty, and insensible to earthly affections, has still some
sympathy for beauty and for virtue. I will put the choice of safety,
and thy future happiness, into thine own hands, and those of the man
whom thou hast chosen; and thou mayst select which thou wilt betwixt
those and misery."

While he thus spoke, one of those ravines or clefts in the earth seemed
to yawn before them, and entering it at the upper end, the spectre
knight, with an attention which he had not yet shown, guided the lady's
courser by the rein down the broken and steep path by which alone the
bottom of the tangled dingle was accessible.

When placed on firm ground after the dangers of a descent, in which her
palfrey seemed to be sustained by the personal strength and address of
the singular being who had hold of the bridle, the lady looked with
some astonishment at a place so well adapted for concealment as that
which she had now reached. It appeared evident that it was used for
this purpose, for more than one stifled answer was given to a very low
bugle-note emitted by the Knight of the Tomb; and when the same note
was repeated, about half a score of armed men, some wearing the dress
of soldiers, others those of shepherds and agriculturists, showed
themselves imperfectly, as if acknowledging the summons.






"Hail to you, my gallant friends!" said the Knight of the Tomb to his
companions, who seemed to welcome him with the eagerness of men engaged
in the same perilous undertaking. "The winter has passed over, the
festival of Palm Sunday is come, and as surely as the ice and snow of
this season shall not remain to chill the earth through the ensuing
summer, so surely we, in a few hours, keep our word to those southern
braggarts, who think their language of boasting and malice has as much
force over our Scottish bosoms, as the blast possesses over the autumn
fruits; but it is not so. While we choose to remain concealed, they may
as vainly seek to descry us, as a housewife would search for the needle
she has dropped among the withered foliage of yon gigantic oak. Yet a
few hours, and the lost needle shall become the exterminating sword of
the Genius of Scotland, avenging ten thousand injuries, and especially
the life of the gallant Lord Douglas, cruelly done to death as an exile
from his native country."

An exclamation between a yell and a groan burst from the assembled
retainers of Douglas, upon being reminded of the recent death of their
chieftain; while they seemed at the same time sensible of the necessity
of making little noise, lest they should give the alarm to some of the
numerous English parties which were then traversing different parts of
the forest. The acclamation, so cautiously uttered, had scarce died
away in silence, when the Knight of the Tomb, or, to call him by his
proper name, Sir James Douglas, again addressed his handful of faithful
followers.

"One effort, my friends, may yet be made to end our strife with the
Southron without bloodshed. Fate has within a few hours thrown into my
power the young heiress of Berkely, for whose sake it is said Sir John
de Walton keeps with such obstinacy the castle which is mine by
inheritance. Is there one among you who dare go, as the honourable
escort of Augusta de Berkely, bearing a letter, explaining the terms on
which I am willing to restore her to her lover, to freedom, and to her
English lordships?"

"If there is none other," said a tall man, dressed in the tattered
attire of a woodsman, and being, in fact, no other than the very
Michael Turnbull, who had already given so extraordinary a proof of his
undaunted manhood, "I will gladly be the person who will be the lady's
henchman on this expedition."

"Thou art never wanting," said the Douglas, "where a manly deed is to
be done; but remember, this lady must pledge to us her word and oath
that she will hold herself our faithful prisoner, rescue or no rescue;
that she will consider herself as pledged for the life, freedom, and
fair usage of Michael Turnbull; and that if Sir John de Walton refuse
my terms, she must hold herself obliged to return with Turnbull to our
presence, in order to be disposed of at our pleasure."

There was much in these conditions, which struck the Lady Augusta with
natural doubt and horror; nevertheless, strange as it may seem, the
declaration of the Douglas gave a species of decision to her situation,
which might have otherwise been unattainable; and from the high opinion
which she entertained of the Douglas's chivalry, she could not bring
herself to think, that any part which he might play in the approaching
drama would be other than that which a perfect good knight would, under
all circumstances, maintain towards his enemy. Even with respect to De
Walton, she felt herself relieved of a painful difficulty. The idea of
her being discovered by the knight himself, in a male disguise, had
preyed upon her spirits; and she felt as if guilty of a departure from
the laws of womanhood, in having extended her favour towards him beyond
maidenly limits; a step, too, which might tend to lessen her in the
eyes of the lover for whom she had hazarded so much.

    "The heart, she said, is lightly prized,
       That is but lightly won;
     And Long shall mourn the heartless man,
       That leaves his love too soon."

On the other hand, to be brought before him as a prisoner, was indeed a
circumstance equally perplexing as unpleasing, but it was one which was
beyond her control, and the Douglas, into whose hands she had fallen,
appeared to her to represent the deity in the play, whose entrance was
almost sufficient to bring its perplexities to a conclusion; she
therefore not unwillingly submitted to take what oaths and promises
were required by the party in whose hands she found herself, and
accordingly engaged to be a true prisoner, whatever might occur.
Meantime she strictly obeyed the directions of those who had her
motions at command, devoutly praying that circumstances, in themselves
so adverse, might nevertheless work together for the safety of her
lover and her own freedom.

A pause ensued, during which a slight repast was placed before the Lady
Augusta, who was well-nigh exhausted with the fatigues of her journey.

Douglas and his partisans, meanwhile, whispered together, as if
unwilling she should hear their conference; while, to purchase their
good-will, if possible, she studiously avoided every appearance of
listening.

After some conversation, Turnbull, who appeared to consider the lady as
peculiarly his charge, said to her in a harsh voice, "Do not fear,
lady; no wrong shall be done you; nevertheless, you must be content for
a space to be blindfolded."

She submitted to this in silent terror; and the trooper, wrapping part
of a mantle round her head, did not assist her to remount her palfrey,
but lent her his arm to support her in this blinded state.






The ground which they traversed was, as Lady Augusta could feel, very
broken and uneven, and sometimes, as she thought, encumbered with
ruins, which were difficult to surmount. The strength of her comrade
assisted her forward on such occasions; but his help was so roughly
administered, that the lady once or twice, in fear or suffering, was
compelled to groan or sigh heavily, whatever was her desire to suppress
such evidence of the apprehension which she underwent, or the pain
which she endured. Presently, upon an occasion of this kind, she was
distinctly sensible that the rough woodsman was removed from her side,
and another of the party substituted in his stead, whose voice, more
gentle than that of his companions, she thought she had lately heard.

"Noble lady," were the words, "fear not the slightest injury at our
hands, and accept of my ministry instead of that of my henchman, who
has gone forward with our letter; do not think me presuming on my
situation if I bear you in my arms through ruins where you could not
easily move alone and blindfold."

At the same time the Lady Augusta Berkely felt herself raised from the
earth in the strong arms of a man, and borne onward with the utmost
gentleness, without the necessity of making those painful exertions
which had been formerly required. She was ashamed of her situation;
but, however delicate, it was no time to give vent to complaints, which
might have given offence to persons whom it was her interest to
conciliate. She, therefore, submitted to necessity, and heard the
following words whispered in her ear.

"Fear nothing; there is no evil intended you; nor shall Sir John de
Walton, if he loves you as you deserve at his hand, receive any harm on
our part. We call on him but to do justice to ourselves and to you; and
be assured you will best accomplish your own happiness by aiding our
views, which are equally in favour of your wishes and your freedom."

The Lady Augusta would have made some answer to this, but her breath,
betwixt fear and the speed with which she was transported, refused to
permit her to use intelligible accents. Meantime she began to be
sensible that she was enclosed within some building, and probably a
ruinous one--for although the mode of her transportation no longer
permitted her to ascertain the nature of her path in any respect
distinctly, yet the absence of the external air--which was, however,
sometimes excluded, and sometimes admitted in furious gusts--intimated
that she was conducted through buildings partly entire, and in other
places admitting the wind through wide rents and gaps. In one place it
seemed to the lady as if she passed through a considerable body of
people, all of whom observed silence, although there was sometimes
heard among them a murmur, to which every one present in some degree
contributed, although the general sound did not exceed a whisper. Her
situation made her attend to every circumstance, and she did not fail
to observe that these persons made way for him who bore her, until at
length she became sensible that he descended by the regular steps of a
stair, and that she was now alone excepting his company. Arrived, as it
appeared to the lady, on more level ground, they proceeded on their
singular road by a course which appeared neither direct nor easy, and
through an atmosphere which was close to a smothering degree, and felt
at the same time damp and disagreeable, as if from the vapours of a
new-made grave. Her guide again spoke.

"Bear up, Lady Augusta, for a little longer, and continue to endure
that atmosphere which must be one day common to us all. By the
necessity of my situation, I must resign my present office to your
original guide, and can only give you my assurance, that neither he,
nor any one else, shall offer you the least incivility or insult--and
on this you may rely, on the faith of a man of honour."

He placed her, as he said these words, upon the soft turf, and, to her
infinite refreshment, made her sensible that she was once more in the
open air, and free from the smothering atmosphere which had before
oppressed her like that of a charnel-house. At the same time, she
breathed in a whisper an anxious wish that she might be permitted to
disencumber herself from the folds of the mantle which excluded almost
the power of breathing, though intended only to prevent her seeing by
what road she travelled. She immediately found it unfolded, agreeably
to her request, and hastened, with uncovered eyes, to take note of the
scene around her.

It was overshadowed by thick oak trees, among which stood some remnants
of buildings, or what might have seemed such, being perhaps the same in
which she had been lately wandering. A clear fountain of living water
bubbled forth from under the twisted roots of one of those trees, and
offered the lady the opportunity of a draught of the pure element, and
in which she also bathed her face, which had received more than one
scratch in the course of her journey, in spite of the care, and almost
the tenderness, with which she had latterly been borne along. The cool
water speedily stopt the bleeding of those trifling injuries, and the
application served at the same time to recall the scattered senses of
the damsel herself. Her first idea was, whether an attempt to escape,
if such should appear possible, was not advisable. A moment's
reflection, however, satisfied her that such a scheme was not to be
thought of; and such second thoughts were confirmed by the approach of
the gigantic form of the huntsman Turnbull, the rough tones of whose
voice were heard before his figure was obvious to her eye.

"Were you impatient for my return, fair lady? Such as I," he continued
in an ironical tone of voice, "who are foremost in the chase of wild
stags and silvan cattle, are not in use to lag behind, when fair
ladies, like you, are the objects of pursuit; and if I am not so
constant in my attendance as you might expect, believe me, it is
because I was engaged in another matter, to which I must sacrifice for
a little even the duty of attending on you."

"I offer no resistance," said the lady; "forbear, however, in
discharging thy duty, to augment my uneasiness by thy conversation, for
thy master hath pledged me his word that he will not suffer me to be
alarmed or ill treated."

"Nay, fair one," replied the huntsman, "I ever thought it was fit to
make interest by soft words with fair ladies; but if you like it not, I
have no such pleasure in hunting for fine holyday terms, but that I can
with equal ease hold myself silent. Come, then, since we must wait upon
this lover of yours ere morning closes, and learn his last resolution
touching a matter which is become so strangely complicated, I will hold
no more intercourse with you as a female, but talk to you as a person
of sense, although an Englishwoman."

"You will," replied the lady, "best fulfil the intentions of those by
whose orders you act, by holding no society with me whatever, otherwise
than is necessary in the character of guide."

The man lowered his brows, yet seemed to assent to what the Lady of
Berkely proposed, and remained silent as they for some time pursued
their course, each pondering over their own share of meditation, which
probably turned upon matters essentially different. At length the loud
blast of a bugle was heard at no great distance from the unsocial
fellow-travellers.

"That is the person we seek," said Turnbull; "I know his blast from any
other who frequents this forest, and my orders are to bring you to
speech of him."

The blood darted rapidly through the lady's veins at the thought of
being thus unceremoniously presented to the knight, in whose favour she
had confessed a rash preference more agreeable to the manners of those
times, when exaggerated sentiments often inspired actions of
extravagant generosity, than in our days, when every thing is accounted
absurd which does not turn upon a motive connected with the immediate
selfish interests of the actor himself. When Turnbull, therefore,
winded his horn, as if in answer to the blast which they had heard, the
lady was disposed to fly at the first impulse of shame and of fear.
Turnbull perceived her intention, and caught hold of her with no very
gentle grasp, saying--"Nay, lady, it is to be understood that you play
your own part in the drama, which, unless you continue on the stage,
will conclude unsatisfactorily to us all, in a combat at outrance
between your lover and me, when it will appear which of us is most
worthy of your favour."

"I will be patient," said the lady, bethinking her that even this
strange man's presence, and the compulsion which he appeared to use
towards her, was a sort of excuse to her female scruples, for coming
into the presence of her lover, at least at her first appearance before
him, in a disguise which her feelings confessed was not extremely
decorous, or reconcilable to the dignity of her sex.

The moment after these thoughts had passed through her mind, the tramp
of a horse was heard approaching; and Sir John de Walton, pressing
through the trees, became aware of the presence of his lady, captive,
as it seemed, in the grasp of a Scottish outlaw, who was only known to
him by his former audacity at the hunting-match.

His surprise and joy only supplied the knight with those hasty
expressions--"Caitiff, let go thy hold! or die in thy profane attempt
to control the motions of one whom the very sun in heaven should be
proud to obey." At the same time, apprehensive that the huntsman might
hurry the lady from his sight by means of some entangled path--such as
upon a former occasion had served him for escape Sir John de Walton
dropt his cumbrous lance, of which the trees did not permit him the
perfect use, and springing from his horse, approached Turnbull with his
drawn sword.

The Scotchman, keeping his left hand still upon the lady's mantle,
uplifted with his right his battle-axe, or Jedwood staff, for the
purpose of parrying and returning the blow of his antagonist, but the
lady spoke.

"Sir John de Walton," she said, "for heaven's sake, forbear all
violence, till you hear upon what pacific object I am brought hither,
and by what peaceful means these wars may be put an end to. This man,
though an enemy of yours, has been to me a civil and respectful
guardian; and I entreat you to forbear him while he speaks the purpose
for which he has brought me hither."

"To speak of compulsion and the Lady de Berkely in the same breath,
would itself be cause enough for instant death," said the Governor of
Douglas Castle; "but you command, lady, and I spare his insignificant
life, although I have causes of complaint against him, the least of
which were good warrant, had he a thousand lives, for the forfeiture of
them all."

"John de Walton," replied Turnbull, "this lady well knows that no fear
of thee operates in my mind to render this a peaceful meeting; and were
I not withheld by other circumstances of great consideration to the
Douglas as well as thyself, I should have no more fear in facing the
utmost thou couldst do, than I have now in levelling that sapling to
the earth it grows upon."

So saying, Michael Turnbull raised his battle-axe, and struck from a
neighbouring oak-tree a branch, wellnigh as thick as a man's arm, which
(with all its twigs and leaves) rushed to the ground between De Walton
and the Scotchman, giving a singular instance of the keenness of his
weapon, and the strength and dexterity with which he used it.

"Let there be truce, then, between us, good fellow," said Sir John de
Walton, "since it is the lady's pleasure that such should be the case,
and let me know what thou hast to say to me respecting her?"

"On that subject," said Turnbull, "my words are few, but mark them, Sir
Englishman. The Lady Augusta Berkely, wandering in this country, has
become a prisoner of the noble Lord Douglas, the rightful inheritor of
the Castle and lordship, and he finds himself obliged to attach to the
liberty of this lady the following conditions, being in all respects
such as good and lawful warfare entitles a knight to exact. That is to
say, in all honour and safety the Lady Augusta shall be delivered to
Sir John de Walton, or those whom he shall name, for the purpose of
receiving her. On the other hand, the Castle of Douglas itself,
together with all out-posts or garrisons thereunto belonging, shall be
made over and surrendered by Sir John de Walton, in the same situation,
and containing the same provisions and artillery, as are now within
their walls; and the space of a month of truce shall be permitted to
Sir James Douglas and Sir John de Walton farther to regulate the terms
of surrender on both parts, having first plighted their knightly word
and oath, that in the exchange of the honourable lady for the foresaid
castle, lies the full import of the present agreement, and that every
other subject of dispute shall, at the pleasure of the noble knights
foresaid, be honourably compounded and agreed betwixt them; or at their
pleasure, settled knightly by single combat according to usage, and in
a fair field, before any honourable person, that may possess power
enough to preside."

It is not easy to conceive the astonishment of Sir John de Walton at
hearing the contents of this extraordinary cartel; he looked towards
the Lady of Berkely with that aspect of despair with which a criminal
may be supposed to see his guardian angel prepare for departure.
Through her mind also similar ideas flowed, as if they contained a
concession of what she had considered as the summit of her wishes, but
under conditions disgraceful to her lover, like the cherub's fiery
sword of yore, which was a barrier between our first parents and the
blessings of Paradise. Sir John de Walton, after a moment's hesitation,
broke silence in these words:--

"Noble lady, you may be surprised if a condition be imposed upon me,
having for its object your freedom; and if Sir John de Walton, already
standing under those obligations to you, which he is proud of
acknowledging, should yet hesitate on accepting, with the utmost
eagerness, what must ensure your restoration to freedom and
independence; but so it is, that the words now spoken have thrilled in
mine ear without reaching to my understanding, and I must pray the Lady
of Berkely for pardon if I take time to reconsider them for a short
space."

"And I," replied Turnbull, "have only power to allow you half an hour
for the consideration of an offer, in accepting which, methinks, you
should jump shoulder-height instead of asking any time for reflection.
What does this cartel exact, save what your duty as a knight implicitly
obliges you to? You have engaged yourself to become the agent of the
tyrant Edward, in holding Douglas Castle, as his commander, to the
prejudice of the Scottish nation, and of the Knight of Douglas Dale,
who never, as a community or as an individual, were guilty of the least
injury towards you; you are therefore prosecuting a false path,
unworthy of a good knight. On the other hand, the freedom and safety of
your lady is now proposed to be pledged to you, with a full assurance
of her liberty and honour, on consideration of your withdrawing from
the unjust line of conduct, in which you have suffered yourself to be
imprudently engaged. If you persevere in it, you place your own honour,
and the lady's happiness, in the hands of men whom you have done
everything in your power to render desperate, and whom, thus irritated,
it is most probable you may find such."

"It is not from thee at least," said the knight, "that I shall learn to
estimate the manner in which Douglas will explain the laws of war, or
De Walton receive them at his dictating."

"I am not, then," said Turnbull, "received as a friendly messenger?
Farewell, and think of this lady as being in any hands but those which
are safe, while you make up at leisure your mind upon the message I
have brought you. Come, madam, we must be gone."

So saying, he seized upon the lady's hand, and pulled her, as if to
force her to withdraw. The lady had stood motionless, and almost
senseless, while these speeches were exchanged between the warriors;
but when she felt the grasp of Michael Turnbull, she exclaimed, like
one almost beside herself with fear--"Help me, De Walton!"

The knight, stung to instant rage, assaulted the forester with the
utmost fury, and dealt him with his long sword, almost at unawares, two
or three heavy blows, by which he was so wounded that he sunk backwards
in the thicket, and. De Walton was about to despatch him, when he was
prevented by the anxious cry of the lady--"Alas! De Walton, what have
you done? This man was only an ambassador, and should have passed free
from injury, while he confined himself to the delivery of what he was
charged with; and if thou hast slain him, who knows how frightful may
prove the vengeance exacted!"

The voice of the lady seemed to recover the huntsman from the effects
of the blows he had received: he sprung on his feet, saying--"Never
mind me, nor think of my becoming the means of making mischief. The
knight, in his haste, spoke without giving me warning and defiance,
which gave him an advantage which, I think, he would otherwise have
scorned to have taken, in such a case, I will renew the combat on
fairer terms, or call another champion, as the knight pleases." With
these words he disappeared.

"Fear not, empress of De Walton's thoughts," answered the knight, "but
believe, that if we regain together the shelter of Douglas Castle, and
the safeguard of Saint George's Cross, thou may'st laugh at all. And if
you can but pardon, what I shall never be able to forgive myself, the
mole-like blindness which did not recognise the sun while under a
temporary eclipse, the task cannot be named too hard for mortal valour
to achieve which I shall not willingly undertake, to wipe out the
memory of my grievous fault."

"Mention it no more," said the lady; "it is not at such a time
as--this, when our lives are for the moment at stake, that quarrels
upon slighter topics are to be recurred to. I can tell you, if you do
not yet know, that the Scots are in arms in this vicinity, and that
even the earth has yawned to conceal them from the sight of your
garrison."

"Let it yawn, then," said Sir John de Walton, "and suffer every fiend
in the infernal abyss to escape from his prison-house and reinforce our
enemies--still, fairest, having received in thee a pearl of matchless
price, my spurs shall be hacked from my heels by the basest scullion,
if I turn my horse's head to the rear before the utmost force these
ruffians can assemble, either upon earth or from underneath it. In thy
name I defy them all to instant combat."

As Sir John de Walton pronounced these last words, in something of an
exalted tone, a tall cavalier, arrayed in black armour of the simplest
form, stepped forth from that part of the thicket where Turnbull had
disappeared. "I am," he said, "James of Douglas, and your challenge is
accepted. I, the challenged, name the arms our knightly weapons as we
now wear them, and our place of combat this field or dingle, called the
Bloody Sykes, the time being instant, and the combatants, like true
knights, foregoing each advantage on either side." [Footnote: The
ominous name of Bloodmire-sink or Syke, marks a narrow hollow to the
north-west of Douglas Castle, from which it is distant about the third
of a mile. Mr. Haddow states, that according to local tradition, the
name was given in consequence of Sir James Douglas having at this spot
intercepted and slain part of the garrison of the castle, while De
Walton was in command.]

"So be it, in God's name," said the English knight, who, though
surprised at being called upon to so sudden an encounter with so
formidable a warrior as young Douglas, was too proud to dream of
avoiding the combat. Making a sign to the lady to retire behind him,
that he might not lose the advantage which he had gained by setting her
at liberty from the forester, he drew his sword, and with a deliberate
and prepared attitude of offence, moved slowly to the encounter. It was
a dreadful one, for the courage and skill both of the native Lord of
Douglas Dale, and of De Walton, among the most renowned of the times,
and perhaps the world of chivalry could hardly have produced two
knights more famous. Their blows fell as if urged by some mighty
engine, where they were met and parried with equal strength and
dexterity; nor seemed it likely, in the course of ten minutes'
encounter, that an advantage would be gained by either combatant over
the other. An instant they stopped by mutually implied assent, as it
seemed, for the purpose of taking breath, during which Douglas said, "I
beg that this noble lady may understand, that her own freedom is no way
concerned in the present contest, which entirely regards the injustice
done by this Sir John de Walton, and by his nation of England, to the
memory of my father, and to my own natural rights."

"You are generous, Sir Knight," replied the lady; "but in what
circumstances do you place me, if you deprive me of my protector by
death or captivity, and leave me alone in a foreign land?"

"If such should be the event of the combat," replied Sir James, "the
Douglas himself, lady, will safely restore thee to thy native land; for
never did his sword do an injury for which he was not willing to make
amends with the same weapon; and if Sir John de Walton will make the
slightest admission that he renounces maintaining the present strife,
were it only by yielding up a feather from the plume of his helmet,
Douglas will renounce every purpose on his part which can touch the
lady's honour or safety, and the combat may be suspended until the
national quarrel again brings us together."

Sir John de Walton pondered a moment, and the lady, although she did
not speak, looked at him with eyes which plainly expressed how much she
wished that he would choose the less hazardous alternative. But the
knight's own scruples prevented his bringing the case to so favourable
an arbitrement.

"Never shall it be said of Sir John de Walton," he replied, "that he
compromised, in the slightest degree, his own honour, or that of his
country. This battle may end in my defeat, or rather death, and in that
case my earthly prospects are closed, and I resign to Douglas, with my
last breath, the charge of the Lady Augusta, trusting that he will
defend her with his life, and find the means of replacing her with
safety in the halls of her fathers. But while I survive, she may have a
better, but will not need another protector than he who is honoured by
being her own choice; nor will I yield up, were it a plume from my
helmet, implying that I have maintained an unjust quarrel, either in
the cause of England, or of the fairest of her daughters. Thus far
alone I will concede to Douglas--an instant truce, provided the lady
shall not be interrupted in her retreat to England, and the combat be
fought out upon another day. The castle and territory of Douglas is the
property of Edward of England, the governor in his name is the rightful
governor, and on this point I will fight while my eyelids are unclosed."

"Time flies," said Douglas, "without waiting for our resolves; nor is
there any part of his motions of such value as that which is passing
with every breath of vital air which we presently draw. Why should we
adjourn till to-morrow that which can be as well finished today? Will
our swords be sharper, or our arms stronger to wield them, than they
are at this moment? Douglas will do all which knight can do to succour
a lady in distress; but he will not grant to her knight the slightest
mark of deference, which Sir John de Walton vainly supposes himself
able to extort by force of arms."

With these words, the knights engaged once more in mortal combat, and
the lady felt uncertain whether she should attempt her escape through
the devious paths of the wood, or abide the issue of this obstinate
fight. It was rather her desire to see the fate of Sir John de Walton,
than any other consideration, which induced her to remain, as if
fascinated, upon the spot, where one of the fiercest quarrels ever
fought--was disputed by two of the bravest champions that ever drew
sword. At last the lady attempted to put a stop to the combat, by
appealing to the bells which began to ring for the service of the day,
which was Palm Sunday.

"For Heaven's sake," she said--"for your own sakes, and for that of
lady's love, and the duties of chivalry, hold your hands only for an
hour, and take chance, that where strength is so equal, means will be
found of converting the truce into a solid peace. Think this is Palm
Sunday, and will you defile with blood such a peculiar festival of
Christianity! Intermit your feud at least so far as to pass to the
nearest church, bearing with you branches, not in the ostentatious mode
of earthly conquerors, but as rendering due homage to the rules of the
blessed Church, and the institutions of our holy religion."

"I was on my road, fair lady, for that purpose, to the holy church of
Douglas," said the Englishman, "when I was so fortunate as to meet you
at this place; nor do I object to proceed thither even, now, holding
truce for an hour, and I fear not to find there friends to whom I can
commit you with assurance of safety, in case I am unfortunate in the
combat which is now broken off, to be resumed after the service of the
day."

"I also assent," said the Douglas, "to a truce for such short space;
nor do I fear that there may be good Christians enough at the church,
who will not see their master overpowered by odds. Let us go thither,
and each take the chance of what Heaven shall please to send us."

From these words Sir John de Walton little doubted that Douglas had
assured himself of a party among those who should there assemble; but
he doubted not of so many of the garrison being present as would bridle
every attempt at rising; and the risk, he thought, was worth incurring,
since ha should thereby secure an opportunity to place Lady Augusta de
Berkely in safety, at least so far as to make her liberty depend on the
event of a general conflict, instead of the precarious issue of a
combat between himself and Douglas.

Both these distinguished knights were inwardly of opinion, that the
proposal of the lady, though it relieved them from their present
conflict, by no means bound them to abstain from the consequences which
an accession of force might add to their general strength, and each
relied upon his superiority, in some degree provided for by their
previous proceedings. Sir John de Walton made almost certain of meeting
with several of his bands of soldiers, who were scouring the country
and traversing the woods by his direction; and Douglas, it may be
supposed, had not ventured himself in person, where a price was set
upon his head, without being attended by a sufficient number of
approved adherents, placed in more or less connexion with each other,
and stationed for mutual support. Each, therefore, entertained
well-grounded hopes, that by adopting the truce proposed, he would
ensure himself an advantage over his antagonist, although neither
exactly knew in what manner or to what extent this success was to be
obtained.





     His talk was of another world--his bodiments
     Strange, doubtful, and mysterious; those who heard him
     Listen'd as to a man in feverish dreams,
     Who speaks of other objects than the present,
     And mutters like to him who sees a vision.
                                                OLD PLAY.


On the same Palm Sunday when De Walton and Douglas measured together
their mighty swords, the minstrel Bertram was busied with the ancient
Book of Prophecies, which we have already mentioned as the supposed
composition of Thomas the Rhymer, but not without many anxieties as to
the fate of his lady, and the events which were passing around him. As
a minstrel he was desirous of an auditor to enter into the discoveries
which he should make in that mystic volume, as well as to assist in
passing away the time; Sir John de Walton had furnished him, in Gilbert
Greenleaf the archer, with one who was well contented to play the
listener "from morn to dewy eve," provided a flask of Gascon wine, or a
stoup of good English ale, remained on the board. It may be remembered
that De Walton, when he dismissed the minstrel from the dungeon, was
sensible that he owed him some compensation for the causeless suspicion
which had dictated his imprisonment, more particularly as he was a
valued servant, and had shown himself the faithful confidant of the
Lady Augusta de Berkely, and the person who was moreover likely to know
all the motives and circumstances of her Scottish journey. To secure
his good wishes was, therefore, politic; and De Walton had intimated to
his faithful archer that he was to lay aside all suspicion of Bertram,
but at the same time keep him in sight, and, if possible, in good
humour with the governor of the castle, and his adherents. Greenleaf
accordingly had no doubt in his own mind, that the only way to please a
minstrel was to listen with patience and commendation to the lays which
he liked best to sing, or the tales which he most loved to tell; and in
order to ensure the execution of his master's commands, he judged it
necessary to demand of the butler such store of good liquor, as could
not fail to enhance the pleasure of his society.

Having thus fortified himself with the means of bearing a long
interview with the minstrel, Gilbert Greenleaf proposed to confer upon
him the bounty of an early breakfast, which, if it pleased him, they
might wash down with a cup of sack, and, having his master's commands
to show the minstrel any thing about the castle which he might wish to
see, refresh their overwearied spirits by attending a part of the
garrison of Douglas to the service of the day, which, as we have
already seen, was of peculiar sanctity. Against such a proposal the
minstrel, a good Christian by profession, and, by his connexion with
the joyous science, a good fellow, having no objections to offer, the
two comrades, who had formerly little good-will towards each other,
commenced their morning's repast on that fated Palm Sunday, with all
manner of cordiality and good fellowship.

"Do not believe, worthy minstrel," said the archer, "that my master in
any respect disparages your worth or rank in referring you for company
or conversation to so poor a man as myself. It is true I am no officer
of this garrison; yet for an old archer, who, for these thirty years,
has lived by bow and bowstring, I do not (Our Lady make me thankful!)
hold less share in the grace of Sir John de Walton, the Earl of
Pembroke, and other approved good soldiers, than many of those giddy
young men on whom commissions are conferred, and to whom confidences
are intrusted, not on account of what they have done, but what their
ancestors have done before them. I pray you to notice among them one
youth placed at our head in De Walton's absence, and who bears the
honoured name of Aymer de Valence, being the same with that of the Earl
of Pembroke, of whom I have spoken; this knight has also a brisk young
page, whom men call Fabian Harbothel."

"Is it to these gentlemen that your censure applies?" answered the
minstrel; "I should have judged differently, having never, in the
course of my experience, seen a young man more courteous and amiable
than the young knight you named."

"I nothing dispute that it may be so," said the archer, hastening to
amend the false step which he had made; "but in order that it should be
so, it will be necessary that he conform to the usages of his uncle,
taking the advice of experienced old soldiers in the emergencies which
may present themselves; and not believing, that the knowledge which it
takes many years of observation to acquire, can be at once conferred by
the slap of the flat of a sword, and the magic words, 'Rise up, Sir
Arthur'--or however the case may be."

"Doubt not, Sir Archer," replied Bertram, "that I am fully aware of the
advantage to be derived from conversing with men of experience like
you: it benefiteth men of every persuasion, and I myself am oft reduced
to lament my want of sufficient knowledge of armorial bearings, signs,
and cognizances, and would right fain have thy assistance, where I am a
stranger alike to the names of places, of persons, and description of
banners and emblems by which great families are distinguished from each
other, so absolutely necessary to the accomplishment of my present
task."

"Pennons and banners," answered the archer, "I have seen right many,
and can assign, as is a soldier's wont, the name of the leader to the
emblem under which he musters his followers; nevertheless, worthy
minstrel, I cannot presume to understand what you call prophecies, with
or under warranted authority of old painted books, expositions of
dreams, oracles, revelations, invocations of damned spirits, judicials,
astrologicals, and other gross and palpable offences, whereby men,
pretending to have the assistance of the devil, do impose upon the
common people, in spite of the warnings of the Privy Council; not
however, that I suspect you, worthy minstrel, of busying yourself with
these attempts to explain futurity, which are dangerous attempts, and
may be truly said to be penal, and part of treason."

"There is something in what you say," replied the minstrel; "yet it
applieth not to books and manuscripts such as I have been consulting;
part, of which things therein written having already come to pass,
authorize us surely to expect the completion of the rest; nor would I
have much difficulty in showing you from this volume, that enough has
been already proved true, to entitle us to look with certainty to the
accomplishment of that which remains."

"I should be glad to hear that," answered the archer, who entertained
little more than a soldier's belief respecting prophecies and auguries,
but yet cared not bluntly to contradict the minstrel upon such
subjects, as he had been instructed by Sir John de Walton to comply
with his humour. Accordingly the minstrel began to recite verses,
which, in our time, the ablest interpreter could not make sense out of.

    "When the cook crows, keep well his comb,
     For the fox and the fulmart they are false both.
     When the raven and the rook have rounded together,
     And the kid in his cliff shall accord to the same.
     Then shall they be bold, and soon to battle thereafter.
     Then the birds of the raven rugs and reives,
     And the leal men of Lothian, are louping on their horse;
     Then shall the poor people be spoiled full near,
     And the Abbeys be burnt truly that stand upon Tweed
     They shall burn and slay, and great reif make:
     There shall no poor man who say whose man he is:
     Then shall the land be lawless, for love there is none.
     Then falset shall have foot fully five years;
     Then truth surely shall be tint, and none shall lippen to other;
     The one cousing shall not trust the other,
     Not the son the father, nor the father the son:
     For to have his goods he would have him hanged."
     &c. &c. &c.

The archer listened to these mystic prognostications, which were not
the less wearisome that they were, in a considerable degree,
unintelligible; at the same time subduing his Hotspur-like disposition
to tire of the recitation, yet at brief intervals comforting himself
with an application to the wine flagon, and enduring as he might what
he neither understood nor took interest in. Meanwhile the minstrel
proceeded with his explanation of the dubious and imperfect
vaticinations of which we have given a sufficient specimen.

"Could you wish," said he to Greenleaf, "a more exact description of
the miseries which have passed over Scotland in these latter days? Have
not these the raven and rook, the fox and the fulmart, explained;
either because the nature of the birds or beasts bear an individual
resemblance to those of the knights who display them on their banners,
or otherwise are bodied forth by actual blazonry on their shields, and
come openly into the field to ravage and destroy? Is not the total
disunion of the land plainly indicated by these words, that connexions
of blood shall be broken asunder, that kinsmen shall not trust each
other, and that the father and son, instead, of putting faith in their
natural connexion, shall seek each other's life, in order to enjoy his
inheritance? The _leal men_ of Lothian are distinctly mentioned as
taking arms, and there is plainly allusion to the other events of these
late Scottish troubles. The death of this last William is obscurely
intimated under the type of a hound, which was that good lord's
occasional cognizance.

  'The hound that was harm'd then muzzled shall be,
  Who loved him worst shall weep for his wreck;
  Yet shall a whelp rise of the same race,
  That rudely shall roar, and rule the whole north,
  And quit the whole quarrel of old deeds done,
  Though he from his hold be kept back awhile.
  True Thomas told me this in a troublesome time,
  In a harvest morning at Eldoun hills.'"

"This hath a meaning, Sir Archer," continued the minstrel, "and which
flies as directly to its mark as one of your own arrows, although there
may be some want of wisdom in making the direct explication. Being,
however, upon assurance with you, I do not hesitate to tell you, that
in my opinion this lion's whelp that awaits its time, means this same
celebrated Scottish prince, Robert the Bruce, who, though repeatedly
defeated, has still, while hunted with bloodhounds, and surrounded by
enemies of every sort, maintained his pretensions to the crown of
Scotland, in despite of King Edward, now reigning."

"Minstrel," answered the soldier, "you are my guest, and we have sat
down together as friends to this simple meal in good comradeship. I
must tell thee, however, though I am loath to disturb our harmony, that
thou art the first who hast adventured to speak a word before Gilbert
Greenleaf in favour of that outlawed traitor, Robert Bruce, who has by
his seditions so long disturbed the peace of this realm. Take my
advice, and be silent on this topic; for, believe me, the sword of a
true English archer will spring from its scabbard without consent of
its master, should it hear aught said to the disparagement of bonny St.
George and his ruddy cross; nor shall the authority of Thomas the
Rhymer, or any other prophet in Scotland, England, or Wales, be
considered as an apology for such unbecoming predictions."

"I were loth to give offence at any time," said the minstrel, "much
more to provoke you to anger, when I am in the very act of experiencing
your hospitality. I trust, however, you will remember that I do not
come your uninvited guest, and that if I speak to you of future events,
I do so without having the least intention to add my endeavour to bring
them to pass; for, God knows, it is many years since my sincere prayer
has been for peace and happiness to all men, and particularly honour
and happiness to the land of Bowmen, in which I was born, and which I
am bound to remember in my prayers beyond all other nations in the
world."

"It is well that you do so," said the archer; "for so you shall best
maintain your bounden duty to the fair land of your birth, which is the
richest that the sun shines upon. Something, however, I would know, if
it suits with your pleasure to tell me, and that is, whether you find
anything in these rude rhymes appearing to affect the safety of the
Castle of Douglas, where we now are?--for, mark me, Sir Minstrel, I
have observed that these mouldering parchments, when or by whomsoever
composed, have so far a certain coincidence with the truth, that when
such predictions which they contain are spread abroad in the country,
and create rumours of plots, conspiracies, and bloody wars, they are
very apt to cause the very mischances which they would be thought only
to predict."

"It were not very cautious in me," said the minstrel, "to choose a
prophecy for my theme, which had reference to any attack on this
garrison; for in such case I should, according to your ideas, lay
myself under suspicion of endeavouring to forward what no person could
more heartily regret than myself."

"Take my word for it, good friend," said the archer, "that it shall not
be thus with thee; for I neither will myself conceive ill of thee, nor
report thee to Sir John de Walton as meditating harm against him or his
garrison--nor, to speak truth, would Sir John de Walton be willing to
believe anyone who did. He thinks highly, and no doubt deservedly, of
thy good faith towards thy lady, and would conceive it unjust to
suspect the fidelity of one who has given evidence of his willingness
to meet death rather than betray the least secret of his mistress."

"In preserving her secret," said Bertram, "I only discharged the duty
of a faithful servant, leaving it to her to judge how long such a
secret ought to be preserved; for a faithful servant ought to think as
little of the issue towards himself of the commission which he bears,
as the band of flock silk concerns itself with the secret of the letter
which it secures. And, touching your question--I have no objections,
although merely to satisfy your curiosity, to unfold to you that these
old prophecies do contain some intimations of wars befalling in Douglas
Dale, between an haggard, or wild hawk, which I take to be the
cognizance of Sir John de Walton, and the three stars, or martlets,
which is the cognizance of the Douglas; and more particulars I could
tell of these onslaughts, did I know whereabouts is a place in these
woods termed Bloody Sykes, the scene also, as I comprehend, of
slaughter and death, between the followers of the three stars and those
who hold the part of the Saxon, or King of England."

"Such a place," replied Gilbert Greenleaf, "I have heard often
mentioned by that name among the natives of these parts; nevertheless
it is vain to seek to discover the precise spot, as these wily Scots
conceal from us with care every thing respecting the geography of their
country, as it is called by learned men; but we may here mention the
Bloody Sykes, Bottomless Myre, and other places, as portentous names,
to which their traditions attach some signification of war and
slaughter. If it suits your wish, however, we can, on our way to the
church, try to find this place called Bloody Sykes, which I doubt not
we shall trace out long before the traitors who meditate an attack upon
us will find a power sufficient for the attempt."

Accordingly the minstrel and archer, the latter of whom was by this
time reasonably well refreshed with wine, marched out of the castle of
Douglas, without waiting for others of the garrison, resolving to seek
the dingle bearing the ominous name of Bloody Sykes, concerning which
the archer only knew that by mere accident he had heard of a place
bearing such a name, at the hunting match made under the auspices of
Sir John de Walton, and knew that it lay in the woods somewhere near
the town of Douglas and in the vicinage of the castle.





      _Hotspur_. I cannot choose; sometimes he angers me
     With telling me of the moldwarp and the ant,
     Of the dreamer Merlin, and his prophecies;
     And of a dragon and a finless fish,
     A clipt-wing'd griffin and a moulten raven,
     A couching lion, and a ramping cat.
     And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff,
     As puts me from my faith.
                                KING HENRY IV.


The conversation between the minstrel and the ancient archer naturally
pursued a train somewhat resembling that of Hotspur and Glendower, in
which Gilbert Greenleaf by degrees took a larger share than was
apparently consistent with his habits and education: but the truth was
that as he exerted himself to recall the recognisances of military
chieftains, their war-cries, emblems, and other types by which they
distinguished themselves in battle, and might undoubtedly be indicated
in prophetic rhymes, he began to experience the pleasure which most men
entertain when they find themselves unexpectedly possessed of a faculty
which the moment calls upon them to employ, and renders them important
in the possession of. The minstrel's sound good sense was certainly
somewhat surprised at the inconsistencies sometimes displayed by his
companion, as he was carried off by the willingness to make show of his
newly-discovered faculty on the one hand, and, on the other, to call to
mind the prejudices which he had nourished during his whole life
against minstrels, who, with the train of legends and fables, were the
more likely to be false, as being generally derived from the "North
Countrie."

As they strolled from one glade of the forest to another, the minstrel
began to be surprised at the number of Scottish votaries whom they met,
and who seemed to be hastening to the church, and, as it appeared by
the boughs which they carried, to assist in the ceremony of the day. To
each of these the archer put a question respecting the existence of a
place called Bloody Sykes, and where it was to be found--but all seemed
either to be ignorant on the subject, or desirous of evading it, for
which they found some pretext in the jolly archer's manner of
interrogation, which savoured a good deal of the genial breakfast. The
general answer was, that they knew no such place, or had other matters
to attend to upon the morn of a holy-tide than answering frivolous
questions. At last, when, in one or two; instances, the answer of the
Scottish almost approached to sullenness, the minstrel remarked it,
observing that there was ever some mischief on foot when the people of
this country could not find a civil answer to their betters, which is
usually so ready among them, and that they appeared to be making a
strong muster for the service of Palm Sunday.

"You will doubtless, Sir Archer," continued the minstrel, "make your
report to your knight accordingly; for I promise you, that if you do
not, I myself, whose lady's freedom is also concerned, will feel it my
duty to place before Sir John de Walton the circumstances which make me
entertain suspicion of this extraordinary confluence of Scottish men,
and the surliness which has replaced their wonted courtesy of manners."

"Tush, Sir Minstrel," replied the archer, displeased at Bertram's
interference, "believe me, that armies have ere now depended on my
report to the general, which has always been perspicuous and clear,
according to the duties of war. Your walk, my worthy friend, has been
in a separate department, such as affairs of peace, old songs,
prophecies, and the like, in which it is far from my thoughts to
contend with you; but credit me, it will be most for the reputation, of
both, that we do not attempt to interfere with what concerns each
other."

"It is far from my wish to do so," replied the minstrel; "but I would.
wish that a speedy return should be made to the castle, in order to ask
Sir John de Walton's opinion of that which we have but just seen."

"To this," replied Greenleaf, "there can be no objection; but, would
you seek the governor at the hour which now is, you will find him most
readily by going to the church of Douglas, to which he regularly wends
on occasions such as the present, with the principal part of his
officers, to ensure, by his presence, that no tumult arise (of which
there is no little dread) between the English and the Scottish. Let us
therefore hold to our original intention of attending the service of
the day, and we shall rid ourselves of these entangled woods, and gain
the shortest road to the church of Douglas."

"Let us go, then, with all despatch," said the minstrel; "and with the
greater haste, that it appears to me that something has passed on this
very spot this morning, which argues that the Christian peace due to
the day has not been inviolably observed. What mean these drops of
blood?" alluding to those which had flowed from the wounds of
Turnbull--"Wherefore is the earth impressed with these deep tints, the
footsteps of armed men advancing and retreating, doubtless, according
to the chances of a fierce and heady conflict?"

"By Our Lady," returned Greenleaf, "I must own that thou seest clear.
What were my eyes made of when they permitted thee to be the first
discoverer of these signs of conflict? Here are feathers of a blue
plume, which I ought to remember, seeing my knight assumed it, or at
least permitted me to place it in his helmet, this morning, in sign of
returning hope, from the liveliness of its colour. But here it lies,
shorn from his head, and, if I may guess, by no friendly hand. Come,
friend, to the church--to the church--and thou shalt have my example of
the manner in which De Walton ought to be supported when in danger."

He led the way through the town of Douglas, entering at the southern
gate, and up the very street in which Sir Aymer de Valence had charged
the Phantom Knight.

We can now say more fully, that the church of Douglas had originally
been a stately Gothic building, whose towers, arising high above the
walls of the town, bore witness to the grandeur of its original
construction. It was now partly ruinous, and the small portion of open
space which was retained for public worship was fitted up in the family
aisle where its deceased lords rested from worldly labours and the
strife of war. From the open ground in the front of the building, their
eye could pursue a considerable part of the course of the river
Douglas, which approached the town from the south-west, bordered by a
line of hills fantastically diversified in their appearance, and in
many places covered with copsewood, which descended towards the valley,
and formed a part of the tangled and intricate woodland by which the
town was surrounded. The river itself, sweeping round the west side of
the town, and from thence northward, supplied that large inundation or
artificial piece of water which we have already mentioned. Several of
the Scottish people, bearing willow branches, or those of yew, to
represent the palms which were the symbol of the day, seemed wandering
in the churchyard as if to attend the approach of some person of
peculiar sanctity, or procession, of monks and friars, come to render
the homage due to the solemnity. At the moment almost that Bertram and
his companion entered the churchyard, the Lady of Berkely, who was in
the act of following Sir John de Walton into the church, after having
witnessed his conflict with the young Knight of Douglas, caught a
glimpse of her faithful minstrel, and instantly determined to regain
the company of that old servant of her house and confidant of her
fortunes, and trust to the chance afterwards of being rejoined by Sir
John de Walton, with a sufficient party to provide for her safety,
which she in no respect doubted it would be his care to collect. She
darted away accordingly from the path in which she was advancing, and
reached the place where Bertram, with his new acquaintance Greenleaf,
were making some enquiries of the soldiers of the English garrison,
whom the service of the day had brought there.

Lady Augusta Berkely, in the meantime, had an opportunity to say
privately to her faithful attendant and guide, "Take no notice of me,
friend Bertram, but take heed, if possible, that we be not again
separated from each other." Having given him this hint, she observed
that it was adopted by the minstrel, and that he presently afterwards
looked round and set his eye upon her, as, muffled in her pilgrim's
cloak, she slowly withdrew to another part of the cemetery, and seemed
to halt, until, detaching himself from Greenleaf, he should find an
opportunity of joining her.

Nothing, in truth, could have more sensibly affected the faithful
minstrel than the singular mode of communication which acquainted him
that his mistress was safe, and at liberty to choose her own motions,
and, as he might hope, disposed to extricate herself from the dangers
which surrounded her in Scotland, by an immediate retreat to her own
country and domain. He would gladly have approached and joined her, but
she took an opportunity by a sign to caution him against doing so,
while at the same time he remained somewhat apprehensive of the
consequences of bringing her under the notice of his new friend,
Greenleaf, who might perhaps think it proper to busy himself so as to
gain some favour with the knight who was at the head of the garrison.
Meantime the old archer continued his conversation with Bertram, while
the minstrel, like many other men similarly situated, heartily wished
that his well-meaning companion had been a hundred fathoms under
ground, so his evanishment had given him license to join his mistress;
but all he had in his power was to approach her as near as he could,
without creating any suspicion.

"I would pray you, worthy minstrel," said Greenleaf, after looking
carefully round, "that we may prosecute together the theme which we
were agitating before we came hither; is it not your opinion, that the
Scottish natives have fixed this very morning for some of those
dangerous attempts which they have repeatedly made, and which are so
carefully guarded against by the governors placed in this district of
Douglas by our good King Edward, our rightful sovereign?"

"I cannot see," replied the minstrel, "on what grounds you found such
an apprehension, or what you see here in the churchyard different from
that you talked of as we approached it, when you held me rather in
scorn, for giving way to some suspicions of the same kind."

"Do you not see," added the archer, "the numbers of men, with strange
faces, and in various disguisements, who are thronging about these
ancient ruins, which are usually so solitary? Yonder, for example, sits
a boy who seems to shun observation, and whose dress, I will be sworn,
has never been shaped in Scotland."

"And if he is an English pilgrim," replied the minstrel, observing that
the archer pointed towards the Lady of Berkely, "he surely affords less
matter of suspicion."

"I know not that," said old Greenleaf, "but I think it will bo my duty
to inform Sir John de Walton, if I can reach him, that there are many
persons here, who in outward appearance neither belong to the garrison,
nor to this part of the country.'"

"Consider," said Bertram, "before you harass with accusation a poor
young man, and subject him to the consequences which must necessarily
attend upon suspicions of this nature, how many circumstances call
forth men peculiarly to devotion at this period. Not only is this the
time of the triumphal entrance of the founder of the Christian religion
into Jerusalem, but the day itself is called Dominica Confitentium, or
the Sunday of Confessors, and the palm-tree, or the box and yew, which
are used as its substitutes, and which are distributed to the priests,
are burnt solemnly to ashes, and those ashes distributed among the
pious, by the priests, upon the Ash-Wednesday of the succeeding year,
all which rites and ceremonies in our country, are observed, by order
of the Christian Church; nor ought you, gentle archer, nor can you
without a crime, persecute those as guilty of designs upon your
garrison, who can ascribe their presence here to their desire to
discharge the duties of the day; and look ye at yon numerous procession
approaching with banner and cross, and, as it appears, consisting of
some churchman of rank, and his attendants; let us first enquire who he
is, and it is probable we shall find in his name and rank sufficient
security for the peaceable and orderly behaviour of those whom piety
has this day assembled at the church of Douglas."

Greenleaf accordingly made the investigation recommended by his
companion, and received information that the holy man who headed the
procession, was no other than the diocesan of the district, the Bishop
of Glasgow, who had come to give his countenance to the rites with
which the day was to be sanctified.

The prelate accordingly entered the walls of the dilapidated
churchyard, preceded by his cross-bearers, and attended by numbers,
with boughs of yew and other evergreens, used on the festivity instead
of palms. Among them the holy father showered his blessing, accompanied
by signs of the cross, which were met with devout exclamations by such
of the worshippers as crowded around him:--"To thee, reverend father,
we apply for pardon for our offences, which we humbly desire to confess
to thee, in order that we may obtain pardon from Heaven."

In this manner the congregation and the dignified clergyman met
together, exchanging pious greeting, and seemingly intent upon nothing
but the rites of the day. The acclamations of the congregation, mingled
with the deep voice of the officiating priest, dispensing the sacred
ritual; the whole forming a scene which, conducted with the Catholic
skill and ceremonial, was at once imposing and affecting.

The archer, on seeing the zeal with which the people in the churchyard,
as well as a number who issued from the church, hastened proudly to
salute the bishop of the diocese, was rather ashamed of the suspicions
which he had entertained of the sincerity of the good man's purpose in
coming hither. Taking advantage of a fit of devotion, not perhaps very
common with old Greenleaf, who at this moment thrust himself forward to
share in. those spiritual advantages which the prelate was dispensing,
Bertram. slipped clear of his English friend, and, gliding to the side
of the Lady Augusta, exchanged, by the pressure of the hand, a mutual
congratulation upon having rejoined company. On a sign by the minstrel,
they withdrew to the inside of the church, so as to remain unobserved
amidst the crowd, in which they were favoured by the dark shadows of
some parts of the building.

The body of the church, broken as it was, and hung round with the
armorial trophies of the last Lords of Douglas, furnished rather the
appearance of a sacrilegiously desecrated ruin, than the inside of a
holy place; yet some care appeared to have been taken to prepare it for
the service of the day. At the lower end hung the great escutcheon of
William Lord of Douglas, who had lately died a prisoner in England;
around that escutcheon were placed the smaller shields of his sixteen
ancestors, and a deep black shadow was diffused by the whole mass,
unless where relieved by the glance of the coronets, or the glimmer of
bearings particularly gay in emblazonry. I need not say that in other
respects the interior of the church was much dismantled, it being the
very same place in which Sir Aymer de Valence held an interview with
the old sexton; and who now, drawing into a separate corner some of the
straggling parties whom he had collected and brought to the church,
kept on the alert, and appeared ready for an attack as well at mid-day
as at the witching hour of midnight. This was the more necessary, as
the eye of Sir John de Walton seemed busied in searching from one place
to another, as if unable to find the object he was in quest of, which
the reader will easily understand to be the Lady Augusta de Berkely, of
whom he had lost sight in the pressure of the multitude. At the eastern
part of the church was fitted up a temporary altar, by the side of
which, arrayed in his robes, the Bishop of Glasgow had taken his place,
with such priests and attendants as composed his episcopal retinue. His
suite was neither numerous nor richly attired, nor did his own
appearance present a splendid specimen of the wealth and dignity of the
episcopal order. When he laid down, however, his golden cross, at the
stern command of the King of England, that of simple wood, which he
assumed instead thereof, did not possess less authority, nor command
less awe among the clergy and people of the diocese.

The various persons, natives of Scotland, now gathered around, seemed
to watch his motions, as those of a descended saint, and the English
waited in mute astonishment, apprehensive that at some unexpected
signal an attack would be made upon them, either by the powers of earth
or heaven, or perhaps by both in combination. The truth is, that so
great was the devotion of the Scottish clergy of the higher ranks to
the interests of the party of Bruce, that the English had become
jealous of permitting them to interfere even with those ceremonies of
the Church which were placed under their proper management, and thence
the presence of the Bishop of Glasgow, officiating at a high festival
in the church of Douglas, was a circumstance of rare occurrence, and
not unattended both with wonder and suspicion. A council of the Church,
however, had lately called the distinguished prelates of Scotland to
the discharge of their duty on the festivity of Palm Sunday, and
neither English nor Scottish saw the ceremony with indifference. An
unwonted silence which prevailed in the church, filled, as it appeared,
with persons of different views, hopes, wishes, and expectations,
resembled one of those solemn pauses which often take place before a
strife of the elements, and are well understood to be the forerunners
of some dreadful concussion of nature. All animals, according to their
various nature, express their sense of the approaching tempest; the
cattle, the deer, and other inhabitants of the walks of the forest,
withdraw to the inmost recesses of their pastures; the sheep crowd into
their fold; and the dull stupor of universal nature, whether animate or
inanimate, presages its speedily awakening into general convulsion and
disturbance, when the lurid lightning shall hiss at command of the
diapason of the thunder.

It was thus that, in deep suspense, those who had come to the church in
arms, at the summons, of Douglas, awaited and expected every moment a
signal to attack, while the soldiers of the English garrison, aware of
the evil disposition of the natives towards them, were reckoning every
moment when the well-known shouts of "Bows and bills!" should give
signal for a general conflict, and both parties, gazing fiercely upon
each other, seemed to expect the fatal onset.

Notwithstanding the tempest, which appeared every moment ready to
burst, the Bishop of Glasgow proceeded with the utmost solemnity to
perform the ceremonies proper to the day; he paused from time to time
to survey the throng, as if to calculate whether the turbulent passions
of those around him would be so long kept under as to admit of his
duties being brought to a close in a manner becoming the time and place.

The prelate had just concluded the service, when a person advanced
towards him with a solemn and mournful aspect, and asked if the
reverend father could devote a few moments to administer comfort to a
dying man, who was lying wounded close by.

The churchman signified a ready acquiescence, amidst a stillness which,
when he surveyed the lowering brows of one party at least of those who
were in the church, boded no peaceful termination to this fated day.
The father motioned to the messenger to show him the way, and proceeded
on his mission, attended by some of those who were understood to be
followers of the Douglas.

There was something peculiarly striking, if not suspicious, in the
interview which followed. In a subterranean vault was deposited the
person of a large tall man, whose blood flowed copiously through two or
three ghastly wounds, and streamed amongst the trusses of straw on
which he lay; while his features exhibited a mixture of sternness and
ferocity, which seemed prompt to kindle into a still more savage
expression.

The reader will probably conjecture that the person in question was no
other than Michael Turnbull, who, wounded in the rencounter of the
morning, had been left by some of his friends upon the straw, which was
arranged for him by way of couch, to live or die as he best could. The
prelate, on entering the vault, lost no time in calling the attention
of the wounded man to the state of his spiritual affairs, and assisting
him to such comfort as the doctrine of the Church directed should be
administered to departing sinners. The words exchanged between them
were of that grave and severe character which passes between the
ghostly father and his pupil, when one world is rolling away from the
view of the sinner, and another is displaying itself in all its
terrors, and thundering in the ear of the penitent that retribution
which the deeds done in the flesh must needs prepare him to expect.
This is one of the most solemn meetings which can take place between
earthly beings; and the courageous character of the Jedwood forester,
as well as the benevolent and pious expression of the old churchman,
considerably enhanced the pathos of the scene.

"Turnbull," said the churchman, "I trust you will believe me when I say
that it grieves my heart to see thee brought to this situation by
wounds which it is my duty to tell you, you must consider mortal."

"Is the chase ended, then?" said the Jedwood man with a sigh. "I care
not, good father, for I think I have borne me as becomes a gallant
quarry, and that the old forest has lost no credit by me, whether in
pursuit, or in bringing to bay; and even in this last matter, methinks
this gay English knight would not have come off with such advantage had
the ground on which we stood been alike indifferent to both, or had I
been aware of his onset; but it will be seen, by any one who takes the
trouble to examine, that poor Michael Turnbull's foot slipped twice in
the _melee_, otherwise it had not been his fate to be lying here in the
dead-thraw; [Footnote: Or death agony.] while yonder southron would
probably have died like a dog, upon this bloody straw, in his place."

The bishop replied, advising his penitent to turn from vindictive
thoughts respecting the death of others, and endeavour to fix his
attention upon his own departure from existence, which seemed shortly
about to take place.

"Nay," replied the wounded man, "you, father, undoubtedly know best
what is fit for me to do; yet methinks it would not be very well with
me if I had prolonged to this time of day the task of revising my life,
and I am not the man to deny that mine has been a bloody and a
desperate one. But you will grant me I never bore malice to a brave
enemy for having done me an injury, and show me the man, being a
Scotchman born, and having a natural love for his own country, who hath
not, in these times, rather preferred a steel cap to a hat and feather,
or who hath not been more conversant with drawn blades than with
prayer-book; and you yourself know, father, whether, in our proceedings
against the English interest, we have not uniformly had the countenance
of the sincere fathers of the Scottish Church, and whether we have not
been exhorted to take arms and make use of them, for the honour of the
King of Scotland, and the defence of our own rights."

"Undoubtedly," said the prelate, "such have been our exhortations
towards our oppressed countrymen, nor do I now teach you a different
doctrine; nevertheless, having now blood around me, and a dying man
before me, I have need to pray that I have not been misled from the
true path, and thus become the means of misdirecting others. May Heaven
forgive me if I have done so, since I have only to plead my sincere and
honest intention in excuse for the erroneous counsel which I may have
given to you and others touching these wars. I am conscious that
encouraging you so to stain your swords in blood, I have departed in
some degree from the character of my profession, which enjoins that we
neither shed blood, nor are the occasion of its being shed. May Heaven
enable us to obey our duties, and to repent of our errors, especially
such as have occasioned the death or distress of our fellow-creatures.
And, above all, may this dying Christian become aware of his errors,
and repent with sincerity of having done to others that which he would
not willingly have suffered at their hand!"

"For that matter," answered Turnbull, "the time has never been when I
would not exchange a blow with the best man who ever lived; and if I
was not in constant practice of the sword, it was because I have been
brought up to the use of the Jedwood-axe, which the English call a
partisan, and which makes little difference, I understand, from the
sword and poniard."

"The distinction is not great," said the bishop; "but I fear, my
friend, that life taken with what you call a Jedwood-axe, gives you no
privilege over him who commits the same deed, and inflicts the same
injury, with any other weapon."

"Nay, worthy father," said the penitent, "I must own that the effect of
the weapons is the same, as far as concerns the man who suffers; but I
would pray of you information, why a Jedwood man ought not to use, as
is the custom of his country, a Jedwood-axe, being, as is implied in
the name, the offensive weapon proper to his country?"

"The crime of murder," said the bishop, "consists not in the weapon
with which the crime is inflicted, but in the pain which the murderer
inflicts upon his fellow-creature, and the breach of good order which
he introduces into heaven's lovely and peaceable creation; and it is by
turning your repentance upon this crime that you may fairly expect to
propitiate Heaven for your offences, and at the same time to escape the
consequences which are denounced in Holy Writ against those by whom
man's blood shall be shed."

"But, good father," said the wounded man, "you know as well as any one,
that in this company, and in this very church, there are upon the watch
scores of both Scotchmen and Englishmen, who come here not so much to
discharge the religious duties of the day, as literally to bereave each
other of their lives, and give a new example of the horror of those
feuds which the two extremities of Britain nourish against each other.
What conduct, then, is a poor man like me to hold? Am I not to raise
this hand against the English, which methinks I still can make a
tolerably efficient one--or am I, for the first time in my life, to
hear the war-cry when it is raised, and hold back my sword from the
slaughter? Methinks it will be difficult, perhaps altogether
impossible, for me to do so; but if such is the pleasure of Heaven, and
your advice, most reverend father, unquestionably I must do my best to
be governed by your directions, as of one who has a right and title to
direct us in every dilemma, or case, as they term it, of troubled
conscience."

"Unquestionably," said the bishop, "it is my duty, as I have already
said, to give no occasion this day for the shedding of blood, or the
breach of peace; and I must charge you, as my penitent, that upon your
soul's safety, you do not minister any occasion to affray or bloodshed,
either by maintaining such in your own person, or inciting others to
the same; for by following a different course of advice, I am certain
that you, as well as myself, would act sinfully and out of character."

"So I will endeavour to think, reverend father," answered the huntsman;
"nevertheless, I hope it will be remembered in my favour that I am the
first person bearing the surname of Turnbull, together with the proper
name of the Prince of Archangels himself, who has at any time been able
to sustain the affront occasioned by the presence of a southron with a
drawn sword, and was not thereby provoked to pluck forth his own
weapon, and to lay about him."

"Take care, my son," returned the Prelate of Glasgow, "and observe,
that even now thou art departing from those resolutions which, but a
few minutes since, thou didst adopt upon serious and just
consideration; wherefore do not be, O my son! like the sow that has
wallowed in the mire, and, having been washed, repeats its act of
pollution, and becomes again yet fouler than it was before."

"Well, reverend father," replied the wounded man, "although it seems
almost unnatural for Scottishmen and English to meet and part without a
buffet, yet I will endeavour most faithfully not to minister any
occasion of strife, nor, if possible, to snatch at any such occasion as
shall be ministered to me."

"In doing so," returned the bishop, "thou wilt best atone for the
injury which thou hast done to the law of Heaven upon former occasions,
and thou shalt prevent the causes for strife betwixt thee and thy
brethren of the southern land, and shalt eschew the temptation towards
that blood-guiltiness which is so rife in this our day and generation.
And do not think that I am imposing upon thee, by these admonitions, a
duty more difficult than it is in thy covenant to bear, as a man and as
a Christian. I myself am a man and a Scotchman, and, as such, I feel
offended at the unjust conduct of the English towards our country and
sovereign; and thinking as you do yourself, I know what you must suffer
when you are obliged to submit to national insults, unretaliated and
unrevenged. But let us not conceive ourselves the agents of that
retributive vengeance which Heaven has, in a peculiar degree, declared
to be its own attribute. Let us, while we see and feel the injuries
inflicted on our own country, not forget that our own raids,
ambuscades, and surprisals, have been at least equally fatal to the
English as their attacks and forays have been to us; and, in short, let
the mutual injuries of the crosses of Saint Andrew and of Saint George
be no longer considered as hostile to the inhabitants of the opposite
district, at least during the festivals of religion; but as they are
mutually signs of redemption, let them be, in like manner, intimations
of forbearance and peace on both sides."

"I am contented," answered Turnbull, "to abstain from all offences
towards others, and shall even endeavour to keep myself from resenting
those of others towards me, in the hope of bringing to pass such a
quiet and godly state of things as your words, reverend father, induce
me to expect." Turning his face to the wall, the Borderer lay in stern
expectation of approaching death, which the bishop left him to
contemplate. The peaceful disposition which the prelate had inspired
into Michael Turnbull, had in some degree diffused itself among those
present, who heard with awe the spiritual admonition to suspend the
national antipathy, and remain in truce and amity with each other.
Heaven had, however, decreed that the national quarrel, in which so
much blood had been sacrificed, should that day again be the occasion
of deadly strife.

A loud flourish of trumpets, seeming to proceed from beneath the earth,
now rung through the church, and roused the attention of the soldiers
and worshippers then assembled. Most of those who heard these warlike
sounds betook themselves to their weapons, as if they considered it
useless to wait any longer for the signal of conflict. Hoarse voices,
rude exclamations, the rattle of swords against their sheaths, or their
clashing against other pieces of armour, gave an awful presage of an
onset, which, however, was for a time averted by the exhortations of
the bishop. A second flourish of trumpets having taken place, the voice
of a herald made proclamation to the following purpose:--

"That whereas there were many noble pursuivants of chivalry presently
assembled in the Kirk of Douglas, and whereas there existed among them
the usual causes of quarrel and points of debate for their advancement
in chivalry, therefore the Scottish knights were ready to fight any
number of the English who might be agreed, either upon the superior
beauty of their ladies, or upon the national quarrel in any of its
branches, or upon whatever point might be at issue between them, which
should be deemed satisfactory ground of quarrel by both; and the
knights who should chance to be worsted in such dispute should renounce
the prosecution thereof, or the bearing arms therein thereafter, with
such other conditions to ensue upon their defeat as might be agreed
upon by a council of the knights present at the Kirk of Douglas
aforesaid. But foremost of all, any number of Scottish knights, from
one to twenty, will defend the quarrel which has already drawn blood,
touching the freedom of Lady Augusta de Berkely, and the rendition of
Douglas Castle to the owner here present. Wherefore it is required that
the English knights do intimate their consent that such trial of valour
take place, which, according to the rules of chivalry, they cannot
refuse, without losing utterly the reputation of valour, and incurring
the diminution of such other degree of estimation as a courageous
pursuivant of arms would willingly be held in, both by the good knights
of his own country, and those of others."

This unexpected gage of battle realized the worst fears of those who
had looked with suspicion on the extraordinary assemblage this day of
the dependents of the House of Douglas. After a short pause, the
trumpets again flourished lustily, when the reply of the English
knights was made in the following terms:--

"That God forbid the rights and privileges of England's knights, and
the beauty of her damsels, should not be asserted by her children, or
that such English knights as were here assembled, should show the least
backwardness to accept the combat offered, whether grounded upon the
superior beauty of their ladies, or whether upon the causes of dispute
between the countries, for either or all of which the knights of
England here present were willing to do battle in the terms of the
indenture aforesaid, while sword and lance shall endure. Saving and
excepting the surrender of the Castle of Douglas, which can be rendered
to no one but England's king, or those acting under his orders."





     Cry the wild war-note, let the champions pass,
     Do bravely each, and God defend the right;
     Upon Saint Andrew thrice can they thus cry,
     And thrice they shout on height,
     And then marked them on the Englishmen,
     As I have told you right.
     Saint George the bright, our ladies' knight,
     To name they were full fain;
     Our Englishmen they cried on height,
     And thrice they shout again.
                                  OLD BALLAD.


The extraordinary crisis mentioned in the preceding chapter, was the
cause, as may be supposed, of the leaders on both sides now throwing
aside all concealment, and displaying their utmost strength, by
marshalling their respective adherents; the renowned Knight of Douglas,
with Sir Malcolm Fleming and other distinguished cavaliers, were seen
in close consultation.

Sir John de Walton, startled by the first flourish of trumpets, while
anxiously endeavouring to secure a retreat for the Lady Augusta, was in
a moment seen collecting his followers, in which he was assisted by the
active friendship of the Knight of Valence.

The Lady of Berkely showed no craven spirit at these warlike
preparations; she advanced, closely followed by the faithful Bertram,
and a female in a riding-hood, whose face, though carefully concealed,
was no other than that of the unfortunate Margaret de Hautlieu, whose
worst fears had been realized as to the faithlessness of her betrothed
knight.

A pause ensued, which for some time no one present thought himself of
authority sufficient to break.

At last the Knight of Douglas stepped forward and said, loudly, "I wait
to know whether Sir John de Walton requests leave of James of Douglas
to evacuate his castle without further wasting that daylight which
might show us to judge a fair field, and whether he craves Douglas's
protection in doing so?"

The Knight of Walton drew his sword. "I hold the Castle of Douglas," he
said, "in spite of all deadly,--and never will I ask the protection
from any one which my own sword is competent to afford me."

"I stand by you, Sir John," said Aymer de Valence, "as your true
comrade, against whatever odds may oppose themselves to us."

"Courage, noble English," said the voice of Greenleaf; "take your
weapons in God's name. Bows and bills! bows and bills!--A messenger
brings us notice that Pembroke is in full march hither from the borders
of Ayrshire, and will be with us in half an hour. Fight on, gallant
English! Valence to the rescue! and long life to the gallant Earl of
Pembroke!"

Those English within and around the church no longer delayed to take
arms, and De Walton, crying out at the height of his voice, "I implore
the Douglas to look nearly to the safety of the ladies," fought his way
to the church door; the Scottish finding themselves unable to resist
the impression of terror which affected them at the sight of this
renowned knight, seconded by his brother-in-arms, both of whom had been
so long the terror of the district. In the meantime, it is possible
that De Walton might altogether have forced his way out of the church,
had he not been met boldly by the young son of Thomas Dickson of
Hazelside, while his father was receiving from Douglas the charge of
preserving the stranger ladies from all harm from the fight, which, so
long suspended, was now on the point of taking place.

De Walton cast his eye upon the Lady Augusta, with a desire of rushing
to the rescue; but was forced to conclude, that he provided best for
her safety by leaving her under the protection of Douglas's honour.

Young Dickson, in the meantime, heaped blow on blow, seconding with all
his juvenile courage every effort he could make, in order to attain the
prize due to the conqueror of the renowned De Walton.

"Silly boy," at length said Sir John, who had for some time forborne
the stripling, "take, then, thy death from a noble hand, since thou
preferrest that to peace and length of days."

"I care not," said the Scottish youth, with his dying breath; "I have
lived long enough, since I have kept you so long in the place where you
now stand."

And the youth said truly, for as he fell never again to rise, the
Douglas stood in his place, and without a word spoken, again engaged
with De Walton in the same formidable single combat, by which they had
already been distinguished, but with even additional fury. Aymer de
Valence drew up to his friend De Walton's left hand, and seemed but to
desire the apology of one of Douglas's people attempting to second him,
to join in the fray; but as he saw no person who seemed disposed to
give him such opportunity, he repressed the inclination, and remained
an unwilling spectator. At length it seemed as if Fleming, who stood
foremost among the Scottish knights, was desirous to measure his sword
with De Valence. Aymer himself, burning with the desire of combat, at
last called out, "Faithless Knight of Boghall! step forth and defend
yourself against the imputation of having deserted your lady-love, and
of being a man-sworn disgrace to the rolls of chivalry!"

"My answer," said Fleming, "even to a less gross taunt, hangs by my
side." In an instant his sword was in his hand, and even the practised
warriors who looked on felt difficulty in discovering the progress of
the strife, which rather resembled a thunder storm in a mountainous
country than the stroke and parry of two swords, offending on the one
side, and keeping the defensive on the other.

Their blows were exchanged with surprising rapidity; and although the
two combatants did not equal Douglas and De Walton in maintaining a
certain degree of reserve, founded upon a respect which these knights
mutually entertained for each other, yet the want of art was supplied
by a degree of fury, which gave chance at least an equal share in the
issue.

Seeing their superiors thus desperately engaged, the partisans, as they
were accustomed, stood still on either side, and looked on with the
reverence which they instinctively paid to their commanders and leaders
in arms. One or two of the women were in the meanwhile attracted,
according to the nature of the sex, by compassion for those who had
already experienced the casualties of war. Young Dickson, breathing his
last among the feet of the combatants, [Footnote: [The fall of this,
brave stripling by the hand of the English governor, and the stern
heroism of the father in turning from the spot where he lay, "a model
of beauty and strength," that he might not be withdrawn from the duty
which Douglas had assigned him of protecting the Lady of Berkely,
excites an interest for both, with which it is almost to be regretted
that history interferes. It was the old man, Thomas Dickson, not his
son, who fell. The _slogan_, "a Douglas, a Douglas," having been
prematurely raised, Dickson, who was within the church, thinking that
his young Lord with his armed band was at hand, drew his sword, and
with only one, man to assist him, opposed the English, who now rushed
to the door. Cut across the middle by an English sword, he still
continued his opposition, till he fell lifeless at the threshold. Such
is tradition, and it is supported by a memorial of some authority--a
tombstone, still to be seen in the church-yard of Douglas, on winch is
sculptured a figure of Dickson, supporting with his left arm his
protruding entrails, and raising his sword with the other in the
attitude of combat.]--_Note by the Rev, Mr. Stewart of Douglas_.] was
in some sort rescued from the tumult by the Lady of Berkely, in whom
the action seemed less strange, owing to the pilgrim's dress which she
still retained, and who in vain endeavoured to solicit the attention of
the boy's father to the task in which she was engaged.

"Cumber yourself not, lady, about that which is bootless," said old
Dickson, "and distract not your own attention and mine from preserving
you, whom it is the Douglas's wish to rescue, and whom, so please God
and St. Bride, I consider as placed by my Chieftain under my charge.
Believe me, this youth's death is in no way forgotten, though this be
not the time to remember it. A time will come for recollection, and an
hour for revenge."

So said the stern old man, reverting his eyes from the bloody corpse
which lay at his feet, a model of beauty and strength. Having taken one
more anxious look, he turned round, and placed himself where he could
best protect the Lady of Berkely, not again turning his eyes on his
son's body.

In the interim the combat continued, without the least cessation on
either side, and without a decided advantage. At length, however, fate
seemed disposed to interfere; the Knight of Fleming, pushing fiercely
forward, and brought by chance almost close to the person of the Lady
Margaret de Hautlieu, missed his blow, and his foot sliding in the
blood of the young victim, Dickson, he fell before his antagonist, and
was in imminent danger of being at his mercy, when Margaret de
Hautlieu, who inherited the soul of a warrior, and, besides, was a very
strong, as well as an undaunted person, seeing a mace of no great
weight lying on the floor, where it had been dropped by the fallen
Dickson, it, at the same instant, caught her eye, armed her hand, and
intercepted, or struck down the sword of Sir Aymer de Valence, who
would otherwise have remained the master of the day at that interesting
moment. Fleming had more to do to avail himself of an unexpected chance
of recovery, than to make a commentary upon the manner in which it had
been so singularly brought about; he instantly recovered the advantage
he had lost, and was able in the ensuing close to trip up the feet of
his antagonist, who fell on the pavement, while the voice of his
conqueror, if he could properly be termed such, resounded through the
church with the fatal words, "Yield thee, Aymer de Valence--rescue or
no rescue--yield thee! --yield ye!" he added, as he placed his sword to
the throat of the fallen knight, "not to me, but to this noble
lady--rescue or no rescue."

With a heavy heart the English knight perceived that he had lost so
favourable an opportunity of acquiring fame, and was obliged to submit
to his destiny, or be slain upon the spot. There was only one
consolation, that no battle was ever more honourably sustained, being
gained as much by accident as by valour.

The fate of the protracted and desperate combat between Douglas and De
Walton did not much longer remain in suspense; indeed, the number of
conquests in single combat achieved by the Douglas in these wars, was
so great, as to make it doubtful whether he was not, in personal
strength and skill, even a superior knight to Bruce himself, and he was
at least acknowledged nearly his equal in the art of war.

So however it was, that when three quarters of an hour had passed in
hard contest, Douglas and De Walton, whose nerves were not actually of
iron, began to show some signs that their human bodies were feeling the
effect of the dreadful exertion. Their blows began to be drawn more
slowly, and were parried with less celerity. Douglas, seeing that the
combat must soon come to an end, generously made a signal, intimating
to his antagonist to hold his hand for an instant.

"Brave De Walton," he said, "there is no mortal quarrel between us, and
you must be sensible that in this passage of arms, Douglas, though he
is only worth his sword and his cloak, has abstained from taking a
decisive advantage when the chance of arms has more than once offered
it. My father's house, the broad domains around it, the dwelling, and
the graves of my ancestors, form a reasonable reward for a knight to
fight for, and call upon me in an imperative voice the prosecute to
strife which has such an object, while you are as welcome to the noble
lady, in all honour and safety, as if you had received her from the
hands of King Edward himself; and I give you my word, that the utmost
honours which can attend a prisoner, and a careful absence of every
thing like injury or insult, shall attend De Walton when he yields up
the castle, as well as his sword to James of Douglas."

"It is the fate to which I am perhaps doomed," replied Sir John de
Walton; "but never will I voluntarily embrace it, and never shall it be
said that my own tongue, saving in the last extremity, pronounced upon
me the fatal sentence to sink the point of my own sword. Pembroke is
upon the march with his whole army, to rescue the garrison of Douglas.
I hear the tramp of his horse's feet even now; and I will maintain my
ground while I am within reach of support; nor do I fear that the
breath which now begins to fail will not last long enough to uphold the
struggle till the arrival of the expected succour. Come on, then, and
treat me not as a child, but as one who, whether I stand or fall, fears
not to encounter the utmost force of my knightly antagonist."

"So be it then," said Douglas, a darksome hue, like the lurid colour of
the thunder-cloud, changing his brow as he spoke, intimating that he
meditated a speedy end to the contest, when, just as the noise of
horses' feet drew nigh, a Welsh knight, known as such by the diminutive
size of his steed, his naked limbs, and his bloody spear, called out
loudly to the combatants to hold their hands.

"Is Pembroke near?" said De Walton.

"No nearer than Loudon Hill," said the Prestantin; "but I bring his
commands to John de Walton."

"I stand ready to obey them through every danger," answered the knight.

"Woe is me," said the Welshman, "that my mouth should bring to the ears
of so brave a man tidings so unwelcome! The Earl of Pembroke yesterday
received information that the castle of Douglas was attacked by the son
of the deceased Earl, and the whole inhabitants of the district.
Pembroke, on hearing this, resolved to march to your support, noble
knight, with all the forces he had at his disposal. He did so, and
accordingly entertained every assurance of relieving the castle, when
unexpectedly he met, on Loudon Hill, a body of men of no very inferior
force to his own, and having at their head that famous Bruce whom the
Scottish rebels acknowledge as their king. He marched instantly to the
attack, swearing he would not even draw a comb through his grey beard
until he had rid England of his recurring plague. But the fate of war
was against us."

He stopt here for lack of breath.

"I thought so!" exclaimed Douglas. "Robert Bruce will now sleep at
night, since he has paid home Pembroke for the slaughter of his friends
and the dispersion of his army at Methuen Wood. His men are, indeed,
accustomed to meet with dangers, and to conquer them: those who follow
him have been trained under Wallace, besides being partakers of the
perils of Bruce himself. It was thought that the waves had swallowed
them when they shipped themselves from the west; but know, that the
Bruce was determined with the present reviving spring to awaken his
pretensions, and that he retires not from Scotland again while he
lives, and while a single lord remains to set his foot by his
sovereign, in spite of all the power which has been so feloniously
employed against him."

"It is even too true," said the Welshman Meredith, "although it is said
by a proud Scotchman.--The Earl of Pembroke, completely defeated, is
unable to stir from Ayr, towards which he has retreated with great
loss: and he sends his instructions to Sir John de Walton, to make the
best terms he can for the surrender of the Castle of Douglas, and trust
nothing to his support."

The Scottish, who heard this unexpected news, joined in a shout so loud
and energetic, that the ruins of the ancient church seemed actually to
rock and threaten to fall on the heads of those who were crowded within
it.

The brow of De Walton was overclouded at the news of Pembroke's defeat,
although in some respects it placed him at liberty to take measures for
the safety of the Lady of Berkely. He could not, however, claim the
same honourable terms which had been offered to him by Douglas before
the news of the battle of Loudon Hill had arrived.

"Noble knight," he said, "it is entirely at your pleasure to dictate
the terms of surrender of your paternal castle; nor have I a right to
claim from you those conditions which, a little while since, your
generosity put in my offer. But I submit to my fate; and upon whatever
terms you think fit to grant me, I must be content to offer to
surrender to you the weapon, of which I now put the point in the earth,
in evidence that I will never more direct it against you until a fair
ransom shall place it once more at my own disposal."

"God forbid," answered the noble James of Douglas, "that I should take
such advantage of the bravest knight out of not a few who have found me
work in battle! I will take example from the Knight of Fleming, who has
gallantly bestowed his captive in guerdon upon a noble damsel here
present; and in like manner I transfer my claim upon the person of the
redoubted Knight of Walton, to the high and noble Lady Augusta Berkely,
who, I hope, will not scorn to accept from the Douglas a gift which the
chance of war has thrown into his hands."

Sir John de Walton, on hearing this unexpected decision, looked up like
the traveller who discovers the beams of the sun breaking through and
dispersing the tempest which has accompanied him for a whole morning.
The Lady of Berkely recollected what became her rank, and showed her
sense of the Douglas's chivalry. Hastily wiping off the tears which had
unwillingly flowed to her eyes, while her lover's safety and her own
were resting on the precarious issue of a desperate combat, she assumed
the look proper to a heroine of that age, who did not feel averse to
accept the importance which was conceded to her by the general voice of
the chivalry of the period. Stepping forward, bearing her person
gracefully, yet modestly, in the attitude of a lady accustomed to be
looked to in difficulties like the present, she addressed the audience
in a tone which might not have misbecome the Goddess of Battle
dispersing her influence at the close of a field covered with the dead
and the dying.

"The noble Douglas," she said, "shall not pass without a prize from the
field which he has so nobly won. This rich string of brilliants, which
my ancestor won from the Sultan of Trebisond, itself a prize of battle,
will be honoured by sustaining, under the Douglas's armour, a lock of
hair of the fortunate lady whom the victorious lord has adopted for his
guide in. chivalry; and if the Douglas, till he shall adorn it with
that lock, will permit the honoured lock of hair which it now bears to
retain its station, she on whose head it grew will hold it as a signal
that poor Augusta de Berkely is pardoned for having gaged any mortal
man in strife with the Knight of Douglas."

"Woman's love," replied the Douglas, "shall not divorce this locket
from my bosom, which I will keep till the last day of my life, as
emblematic of female worth and female virtue. And, not to encroach upon
the valued and honoured province of Sir John de Walton, be it known to
all men, that whoever shall say that the Lady Augusta of Berkely has,
in this entangled matter, acted otherwise than becomes the noblest of
her sex, he will do well to be ready to maintain such a proposition
with his lance, against James of Douglas, in a fair field."

This speech was heard with approbation on all sides; and the news
brought by Meredith of the defeat of the Earl of Pembroke, and his
subsequent retreat, reconciled the fiercest of the English soldiers to
the surrender of Douglas Castle. The necessary conditions were speedily
agreed on, which put the Scottish in possession of this stronghold,
together with the stores, both of arms and ammunition, of every kind
which it contained. The garrison had it to boast, that they obtained a
free passage, with their horses and arms, to return by the shortest and
safest route to the marches of England, without either suffering or
inflicting damage.

Margaret of Hautlieu was not behind in acting a generous part; the
gallant Knight of Valence was allowed to accompany his friend De Walton
and the Lady Augusta to England, and without ransom.

The venerable prelate of Glasgow, seeing what appeared at one time
likely to end in a general conflict, terminate so auspiciously for his
country, contented himself with bestowing his blessing on the assembled
multitude, and retiring with those who came to assist in the service of
the day.

This surrender of Douglas Castle upon the Palm Sunday of 19th March,
1306-7, was the beginning of a career of conquest which was
uninterrupted, in which the greater part of the strengths and
fortresses of Scotland were yielded to those who asserted the liberty
of their country, until the crowning mercy was gained in the celebrated
field of Bannockburn, where the English sustained a defeat more
disastrous than is mentioned upon any other occasion in their annals.

Little need be said of the fate of the persons of this story. King
Edward was greatly enraged at Sir John de Walton for having surrendered
the Castle of Douglas, securing at the same time his own object, the
envied hand of the heiress of Berkely. The knights to whom he referred
the matter as a subject of enquiry, gave it nevertheless as their
opinion that De Walton was void of all censure, having discharged his
duty in its fullest extent, till the commands of his superior officer
obliged him to surrender tho Dangerous Castle.

A singular renewal of intercourse took place, many months afterwards,
between Margaret of Hautlieu and her lover, Sir Malcolm Fleming. The
use which the lady made of her freedom, and of the doom of the Scottish
Parliament, which put her in possession of her father's inheritance,
was to follow her adventurous spirit through dangers not usually
encountered by those of her sex; and the Lady of Hautlieu was not only
a daring follower of the chase, but it was said that she was even not
daunted in the battlefield. She remained faithful to the political
principles which she had adopted at an early period; and it seemed as
if she had formed the gallant resolution of shaking the god Cupid from
her horse's mane, if not treading him beneath her horse's feet.

The Fleming, although he had vanished from the neighbourhood of the
counties of Lanark and Ayr, made an attempt to state his apology to the
Lady de Hautlieu herself, who returned his letter unopened, and
remained to all appearance resolved never again to enter upon the topic
of their original engagement. It chanced, however, at a later period of
the war with England, while Fleming was one night travelling upon the
Border, after the ordinary fashion of one who sought adventures, a
waiting-maid, equipped in a fantastic habit, asked the protection of
his arm in the name of her lady, who, late in the evening, had been
made captive, she said, by certain ill-disposed caitiffs, who were
carrying her by force through the forest. The Fleming's lance was, of
course, in its rest, and woe betide the faitour whose lot it was to
encounter its thrust; the first fell, incapable of further combat, and
another of the felons encountered the same fate with little more
resistance. The lady, released from the discourteous cord which
restrained her liberty, did not hesitate to join company with the brave
knight by whom she had been rescued; and although the darkness did not
permit her to recognise her old lover in her liberator, yet she could
not but lend a willing ear to the conversation with which he
entertained her, as they proceeded on the way. He spoke of the fallen
caitiffs as being Englishmen, who found a pleasure in exercising
oppression and barbarities upon the wandering damsels of Scotland, and
whose cause, therefore, the champions of that country were bound to
avenge while the blood throbbed in their veins. He spoke of the
injustice of the national quarrel which had afforded a pretence for
such deliberate oppression; and the lady, who herself had suffered so
much by the interference of the English in the affairs of Scotland,
readily acquiesced in the sentiments which he expressed on a subject
which she had so much reason for regarding as an afflicting one. Her
answer was given in the spirit of a person who would not hesitate, if
the times should call for such an example, to defend even with her hand
the rights which she asserted with her tongue.

Pleased with the sentiments which she expressed, and recognising in her
voice that secret charm, which, once impressed upon the human heart, is
rarely wrought out of the remembrance by a long train of subsequent
events, he almost persuaded himself that the tones were familiar to
him, and had at one time formed the key to his innermost affections. In
proceeding on their journey, the knight's troubled state of mind was
augmented instead of being diminished. The scenes of his earliest youth
were recalled by circumstances so slight, as would in ordinary cases
have produced no effect whatever; the sentiments appeared similar to
those which his life had been devoted to enforce, and he half persuaded
himself that the dawn of day was to be to him the beginning of a
fortune equally singular and extraordinary.

In the midst of this anxiety, Sir Malcolm Fleming had no anticipation
that the lady whom he had heretofore rejected was again thrown into his
path, after years of absence; still less, when daylight gave him a
partial view of his fair companion's countenance, was he prepared to
believe that he was once again to term himself the champion of Margaret
de Hautlieu, but it was so. The lady, on that direful morning when she
retired from the church of Douglas, had not resolved (indeed what lady
ever did?) to renounce, without some struggle, the beauties which she
had once possessed. A long process of time, employed under skilful
hands, had succeeded in obliterating the scars which remained as the
marks of her fall. These were now considerably effaced, and the lost
organ of sight no longer appeared so great a blemish, concealed, as it
was, by a black ribbon, and the arts of the tirewoman, who made it her
business to shadow it over by a lock of hair. In a word, he saw the
same Margaret de Hautlieu, with no very different style of expression
from that which her face, partaking of the high and passionate
character of her soul, had always presented. It seemed to both,
therefore, that their fate, by bringing them together after a
separation which appeared so decisive, had intimated its _fiat_ that
their fortunes were inseparable from each other. By the time that the
summer sun had climbed high in the heavens, the two travellers rode
apart from their retinue, conversing together with an eagerness which
marked the important matters of discussion between them; and in a short
time it was made generally known through Scotland, that Sir Malcolm
Fleming and the Lady Margaret de Hautlieu were to be united at the
court of the good King Robert, and the husband invested with the
honours of Biggar and Cumbernauld, an earldom so long known in the
family of Fleming.

The gentle reader is acquainted, that these are, in all probability,
the last tales which it will be the lot of the Author to submit to the
public. He is now on the eve of visiting foreign parts; a ship of war
is commissioned by its Royal Master to carry the Author of Waverley to
climates in which he may possibly obtain such a restoration of health
as may serve him to spin his thread to an end in his own country. Had
he continued to prosecute his usual literary labours, it seems indeed
probable, that at the term of years he has already attained, the bowl,
to use the pathetic language of Scripture, would have been broken at
the fountain; and little can one, who has enjoyed on the whole an
uncommon share of the most inestimable of worldly blessings, be
entitled to complain, that life, advancing to its period, should be
attended with its usual proportions of shadows and storms. They have
affected him at least in no more painful manner than is inseparable
from the discharge of this part of the debt of humanity. Of those whose
relation to him in the ranks of life might have ensured him their
sympathy under indisposition, many are now no more; and those who may
yet follow in his wake, are entitled to expect, in bearing inevitable
evils, an example of firmness and patience, more especially on the part
of one who has enjoyed no small good fortune during the course of his
pilgrimage.

The public have claims on his gratitude, for which the Author of
Waverley has no adequate means of expression; but he may be permitted
to hope, that the powers of his mind, such as they are, may not have a
different date from those of his body; and that he may again meet his
patronising friends, if not exactly in his old fashion of literature,
at least in some branch, which may not call forth the remark, that--

      "Superfluous lags the veteran on the stage."

ABBOTSFORD, _September_, 1831.

