CHAPTER THE FIRST.

     _Leontius_.-------- That power that kindly spreads
     The clouds, a signal of impending showers,
     To warn the wandering linnet to the shade,
     Beheld without concern expiring Greece,
     And not one prodigy foretold our fate.

     _Demetrius_. A thousand horrid prodigies foretold it:
     A feeble government, eluded laws,
     A factious populace, luxurious nobles,
     And all the maladies of sinking states.
     When public villany, too strong for justice,
     Shows his bold front, the harbinger of ruin,
     Can brave Leontius call for airy wonders,
     Which cheats interpret, and which fools regard?
                               IRENE, _Act I_.


The close observers of vegetable nature have remarked, that when a new
graft is taken from an aged tree, it possesses indeed in exterior form
the appearance of a youthful shoot, but has in fact attained to the
same state of maturity, or even decay, which has been reached by the
parent stem. Hence, it is said, arises the general decline and death
that about the same season is often observed to spread itself through
individual trees of some particular species, all of which, deriving
their vital powers from the parent stock, are therefore incapable of
protracting their existence longer than it does.

In the same manner, efforts have been made by the mighty of the earth
to transplant large cities, states, and communities, by one great and
sudden exertion, expecting to secure to the new capital the wealth, the
dignity, the magnificent decorations and unlimited extent of the
ancient city, which they desire to renovate; while, at the same time,
they hope to begin a new succession of ages from the date of the new
structure, to last, they imagine, as long, and with as much fame, as
its predecessor, which the founder hopes his new metropolis may replace
in all its youthful glories. But nature has her laws, which seem to
apply to the social, as well as the vegetable system. It appears to be
a general rule, that what is to last long should be slowly matured and
gradually improved, while every sudden effort, however gigantic, to
bring about the speedy execution of a plan calculated to endure for
ages, is doomed to exhibit symptoms of premature decay from its very
commencement. Thus, in a beautiful Oriental tale, a dervise explains to
the sultan how he had reared the magnificent trees among which they
walked, by nursing their shoots from the seed; and the prince's pride
is damped when he reflects, that those plantations, so simply raised,
were gathering new vigour from each returning sun, while his own
exhausted cedars, which had been transplanted by one violent effort,
were drooping their majestic heads in the Valley of Orez. [Footnote:
Tale of Mirglip the Persian, in the Tales of the Genii.]

It has been allowed, I believe, by all men of taste, many of whom have
been late visitants of Constantinople, that if it were possible to
survey the whole globe with a view to fixing a seat of universal
empire, all who are capable of making such a choice, would give their
preference to the city of Constantine, as including the great
recommendations of beauty, wealth, security, and eminence. Yet with all
these advantages of situation and climate, and with all the
architectural splendour of its churches and halls, its quarries of
marble, and its treasure-houses of gold, the imperial founder must
himself have learned, that although he could employ all these rich
materials in obedience to his own wish, it was the mind of man itself,
those intellectual faculties refined by the ancients to the highest
degree, which had produced the specimens of talent at which men paused
and wondered, whether as subjects of art or of moral labour. The power
of the Emperor might indeed strip other cities of their statues and
their shrines, in order to decorate that which he had fixed upon as his
new capital; but the men who had performed great actions, and those,
almost equally esteemed, by whom such deeds were celebrated, in poetry,
in painting, and in music, had ceased to exist. The nation, though
still the most civilised in the world, had passed beyond that period of
society, when the desire of fair fame is of itself the sole or chief
motive for the labour of the historian or the poet, the painter or the
statuary. The slavish and despotic constitution introduced into the
empire, had long since entirely destroyed that public spirit which
animated the free history of Rome, leaving nothing but feeble
recollections, which produced no emulation.

To speak as of an animated substance, if Constantine could have
regenerated his new metropolis, by transfusing into it the vital and
vivifying principles of old Rome,--that brilliant spark no longer
remained for Constantinople to borrow, or for Rome to lend.

In one most important circumstance, the state of the capital of
Constantine had been totally changed, and unspeakably to its advantage.
The world was now Christian, and, with the Pagan code, had got rid of
its load of disgraceful superstition. Nor is there the least doubt,
that the better faith produced its natural and desirable fruits in
society, in gradually ameliorating the hearts, and taming the passions,
of the people. But while many of the converts were turning meekly
towards their new creed, some, in the arrogance of their understanding,
were limiting the Scriptures by their own devices, and others failed
not to make religious character or spiritual rank the means of rising
to temporal power. Thus it happened at this critical period, that the
effects of this great change in the religion of the country, although
producing an immediate harvest, as well as sowing much good seed which
was to grow hereafter, did not, in the fourth century, flourish so as
to shed at once that predominating influence which its principles might
have taught men to expect.

Even the borrowed splendour, in which Constantine decked his city, bore
in it something which seemed to mark premature decay. The imperial
founder, in seizing upon the ancient statues, pictures, obelisks, and
works of art, acknowledged his own incapacity to supply their place
with the productions of later genius; and when the world, and
particularly Rome, was plundered to adorn Constantinople, the Emperor,
under whom the work was carried on, might be compared to a prodigal
youth, who strips an aged parent of her youthful ornaments, in order to
decorate a flaunting paramour, on whose brow all must consider them as
misplaced.

Constantinople, therefore, when in 324 it first arose in imperial
majesty out of the humble Byzantium, showed, even in its birth, and
amid its adventitious splendour, as we have already said, some
intimations of that speedy decay to which the whole civilised world,
then limited within the Roman empire, was internally and imperceptibly
tending. Nor was it many ages ere these prognostications of declension
were fully verified.

In the year 1080, Alexius Comnenus [Footnote: See Gibbon, Chap. xlviii,
for the origin and early history of the house of the Comneni.] ascended
the throne of the Empire; that is, he was declared sovereign of
Constantinople, its precincts and dependencies; nor, if he was disposed
to lead a life of relaxation, would the savage incursions of the
Scythians or the Hungarians frequently disturb the imperial slumbers,
if limited to his own capital. It may be supposed that this safety did
not extend much farther; for it is said that the Empress Pulcheria had
built a church to the Virgin Mary, as remote as possible from the gate
of the city, to save her devotions from the risk of being interrupted
by the hostile yell of the barbarians, and the reigning Emperor had
constructed a palace near the same spot, and for the same reason.

Alexius Comnenus was in the condition of a monarch who rather derives
consequence from the wealth and importance of his predecessors, and the
great extent of their original dominions, than from what remnants of
fortune had descended to the present generation. This Emperor, except
nominally, no more ruled over his dismembered provinces, than a
half-dead horse can exercise power over those limbs, on which the
hooded crow and the vulture have already begun to settle and select
their prey.

In different parts of his territory, different enemies arose, who waged
successful or dubious war against the Emperor; and, of the numerous
nations with whom he was engaged in hostilities, whether the Franks
from the west, the Turks advancing from the east, the Cumans and
Scythians pouring their barbarous numbers and unceasing storm of arrows
from the north, and the Saracens, or the tribes into which they were
divided, pressing from the south, there was not one for whom the
Grecian empire did not spread a tempting repast. Each of these various
enemies had their own particular habits of war, and a way of
manoeuvring in battle peculiar to themselves. But the Roman, as the
unfortunate subject of the Greek empire was still called, was by far
the weakest, the most ignorant, and most timid, who could be dragged
into the field; and the Emperor was happy in his own good luck, when he
found it possible to conduct a defensive war on a counterbalancing
principle, making use of the Scythian to repel the Turk, or of both
these savage people to drive back the fiery-footed Frank, whom Peter
the Hermit had, in the time of Alexius, waked to double fury, by the
powerful influence of the crusades.

If, therefore, Alexius Comnenus was, during his anxious seat upon the
throne of the East, reduced to use a base and truckling course of
policy--if he was sometimes reluctant to fight when he had a conscious
doubt of the valour of his troops--if he commonly employed cunning and
dissimulation instead of wisdom, and perfidy instead of courage--his
expedients were the disgrace of the age, rather than his own.

Again, the Emperor Alexius may be blamed for affecting a degree of
state which was closely allied to imbecility. He was proud of assuming
in his own person, and of bestowing upon others, the painted show of
various orders of nobility, even now, when the rank within the prince's
gift was become an additional reason for the free barbarian despising
the imperial noble. That the Greek court was encumbered with unmeaning
ceremonies, in order to make amends for the want of that veneration
which ought to have been called forth by real worth, and the presence
of actual power, was not the particular fault of that prince, but
belonged to the system of the government of Constantinople for ages.
Indeed, in its trumpery etiquette, which provided rules for the most
trivial points of a man's behaviour during the day, the Greek empire
resembled no existing power in its minute follies, except that of
Pekin; both, doubtless, being influenced by the same vain wish, to add
seriousness and an appearance of importance to objects, which, from
their trivial nature, could admit no such distinction.

Yet thus far we must justify Alexius, that humble as were the
expedients he had recourse to, they were more useful to his empire than
the measures of a more proud and high-spirited prince might have proved
in the same circumstances. He was no champion to break a lance against
the breast-plate of his Frankish rival, the famous Bohemond of
Antioch,[Footnote: Bohemond, son of Robert Guiscard, the Norman
conqueror of Apulia, Calabria, and Sicily, was, at the time when the
first crusade began, Count of Tarentum. Though far advanced in life, he
eagerly joined the expedition of the Latins, and became Prince of
Antioch. For details of his adventures, death, and extraordinary
character, see Gibbon, chap. lix, and Mills' History of the Crusades,
vol. i.] but there were many occasions on which he hazarded his life
freely; and, so far as we can see, from a minute perusal of his
achievements, the Emperor of Greece was never so dangerous "under
shield," as when any foeman desired to stop him while retreating from a
conflict in which he had been worsted.

But, besides that he did not hesitate, according to the custom of the
time, at least occasionally, to commit his person to the perils of
close combat, Alexius also possessed such knowledge of a general's
profession, as is required in our modern days. He knew how to occupy
military positions to the best advantage, and often covered defeats, or
improved dubious conflicts, in a manner highly to the disappointment of
those who deemed that the work of war was done only on the field of
battle.

If Alexius Comnenus thus understood the evolutions of war, he was still
better skilled in those of politics, where, soaring far above the
express purpose of his immediate negotiation, the Emperor was sure to
gain some important and permanent advantage; though very often he was
ultimately defeated by the unblushing fickleness, or avowed treachery
of the barbarians, as the Greeks generally termed all other nations,
and particularly those tribes, (they can hardly be termed states,) by
which their own empire was surrounded.

We may conclude our brief character of Comnenus, by saying, that, had
he not been called on to fill the station of a monarch who was under
the necessity of making himself dreaded, as one who was exposed to all
manner of conspiracies, both in and out of his own family, he might, in
all probability, have been regarded as an honest and humane prince.
Certainly he showed himself a good-natured man, and dealt less in
cutting off heads and extinguishing eyes, than had been the practice of
his predecessors, who generally took this method of shortening the
ambitious views of competitors.

It remains to be mentioned, that Alexius had his full share of the
superstition of the age, which he covered with a species of hypocrisy.
It is even said, that his wife, Irene, who of course was best
acquainted with the real character of the Emperor, taxed her dying
husband with practising, in his last moments, the dissimulation which
had been his companion during life. [Footnote: See Gibbon, chap. lvi.]
He took also a deep interest in all matters respecting the Church,
where heresy, which the Emperor held, or affected to hold, in great
horror, appeared to him to lurk. Nor do we discover in his treatment of
the Manichaeans, or Paulicians, that pity for their speculative errors,
which modern times might think had been well purchased by the extent of
the temporal services of these unfortunate sectaries. Alexius knew no
indulgence for those who misinterpreted the mysteries of the Church, or
of its doctrines; and the duty of defending religion against
schismatics was, in his opinion, as peremptorily demanded from him, as
that of protecting the empire against the numberless tribes of
barbarians who were encroaching on its boundaries on every side.

Such a mixture of sense and weakness, of meanness and dignity, of
prudent discretion and poverty of spirit, which last, in the European
mode of viewing things, approached to cowardice, formed the leading
traits of the character of Alexius Comnenus, at a period when the fate
of Greece, and all that was left in that country of art and
civilization, was trembling in the balance, and likely to be saved or
lost, according to the abilities of the Emperor for playing the very
difficult game which was put into his hands.

These few leading circumstances will recall, to any one who is
tolerably well read in history, the peculiarities of the period at
which we have found a resting-place for the foundation of our story.




CHAPTER THE SECOND.

     _Othus_. ------------- This superb successor
     Of the earth's mistress, as thou vainly speakest,
     Stands midst these ages as, on the wide ocean,
     The last spared fragment, of a spacious land,
     That in some grand and awful ministration
     Of mighty nature has engulfed been,
     Doth lift aloft its dark and rocky cliffs
     O'er the wild waste around, and sadly frowns
     In lonely majesty.
             CONSTANTINE PALEOLOGUS, _Scene I_.


Our scene in the capital of the Eastern Empire opens at what is termed
the Golden Gate of Constantinople; and it may be said in passing, that
this splendid epithet is not so lightly bestowed as may be expected
from the inflated language of the Greeks, which throws such an
appearance of exaggeration about them, their buildings, and monuments.

The massive, and seemingly impregnable walls with which Constantine
surrounded the city, were greatly improved and added to by Theodosius,
called the Great. A triumphal arch, decorated with the architecture of
a better, though already a degenerate age, and serving, at the same
time, as a useful entrance, introduced the stranger into the city. On
the top, a statue of bronze represented Victory, the goddess who had
inclined the scales of battle in favour of Theodosius; and, as the
artist determined to be wealthy if he could not be tasteful, the gilded
ornaments with which the inscriptions were set off, readily led to the
popular name of the gate. Figures carved in a distant and happier
period of the art, glanced from the walls, without assorting happily
with the taste in which these were built. The more modern ornaments of
the Golden Gate bore, at the period of our story, an aspect very
different from those indicating the "conquest brought back to the
city," and the "eternal peace" which the flattering inscriptions
recorded as having been extorted by the sword of Theodosius. Four or
five military engines, for throwing darts of the largest size, were
placed upon the summit of the arch; and what had been originally
designed as a specimen of architectural embellishment, was now applied
to the purposes of defence.

It was the hour of evening, and the cool and refreshing breeze from the
sea inclined each passenger, whose business was not of a very urgent
description, to loiter on his way, and cast a glance at the romantic
gateway, and the various interesting objects of nature and art, which
the city of Constantinople presented, as well to the inhabitants as to
strangers. [Footnote: The impression which the imperial city was
calculated to make on such visitors as the Crusaders of the West, is
given by the ancient French chronicler Villehardouin, who was present
at the capture of A. D. 1203. "When we had come," he says, "within
three leagues, to a certain Abbey, then we could plainly survey
Constantinople. There the ships and the galleys came to anchor; and
much did they who had never been in that quarter before, gaze upon the
city. That such a city could be in the world they had never conceived,
and they were never weary of staring at the high walls and towers with
which it was entirely encompassed, the rich palaces and lofty churches,
of which there were so many that no one could have believed it, if he
had not seen with his own eyes that city, the Queen of all cities. And
know that there was not so bold a heart there, that it did not feel
some terror at the strength of Constantinople."--Chap. 66.

Again,--"And now many of those of the host went to see Constantinople
within, and the rich palaces and stately churches, of which it
possesses so many, and the riches of the place, which are such as no
other city ever equalled. I need not speak of the sanctuaries, which
are as many as are in all the world beside."--Chap. 100.]

One individual, however, seemed to indulge more wonder and curiosity
than could have been expected from a native of the city, and looked
upon the rarities around with a quick and startled eye, that marked an
imagination awakened by sights that were new and strange. The
appearance of this person bespoke a foreigner of military habits, who
seemed, from his complexion, to have his birthplace far from the
Grecian metropolis, whatever chance had at present brought him to the
Golden Gate, or whatever place he filled in the Emperor's service.

This young man was about two-and-twenty years old, remarkably
finely-formed and athletic--qualities well understood by the citizens
of Constantinople, whose habits of frequenting the public games had
taught them at least an acquaintance with the human person, and where,
in the select of their own countrymen, they saw the handsomest
specimens of the human race.

These were, however, not generally so tall as the stranger at the
Golden Gate, while his piercing blue eyes, and the fair hair which
descended from under a light helmet gaily ornamented with silver,
bearing on its summit a crest resembling a dragon in the act of
expanding his terrible jaws, intimated a northern descent, to which the
extreme purity of his complexion also bore witness. His beauty,
however, though he was eminently distinguished both in features and in
person, was not liable to the charge of effeminacy. From this it was
rescued, both by his strength, and by the air of confidence and
self-possession with which the youth seemed to regard the wonders
around him, not indicating the stupid and helpless gaze of a mind
equally inexperienced, and incapable of receiving instruction, but
expressing the bold intellect which at once understands the greater
part of the information which it receives, and commands the spirit to
toil in search of the meaning of that which it has not comprehended, or
may fear it has misinterpreted. This look of awakened attention and
intelligence gave interest to the young barbarian; and while the
bystanders were amazed that a savage from some unknown or remote corner
of the universe should possess a noble countenance bespeaking a mind so
elevated, they respected him for the composure with which he witnessed
so many things, the fashion, the splendour, nay, the very use of which,
must have been recently new to him.

The young man's personal equipments exhibited a singular mixture of
splendour and effeminacy, and enabled the experienced spectators to
ascertain his nation, and the capacity in which he served. We have
already mentioned the fanciful and crested helmet, which was a
distinction of the foreigner, to which the reader must add in his
imagination a small cuirass, or breastplate of silver, so sparingly
fashioned as obviously to afford little security to the broad chest, on
which it rather hung like an ornament than covered as a buckler; nor,
if a well-thrown dart, or strongly-shod arrow, should alight full on
this rich piece of armour, was there much hope that it could protect
the bosom which it partially shielded.

From betwixt the shoulders hung down over the back what had the
appearance of a bearskin; but, when more closely examined, it was only
a very skilful imitation, of the spoils of the chase, being in reality
a surcoat composed of strong shaggy silk, so woven as to exhibit, at a
little distance, no inaccurate representation of a bear's hide. A light
crooked sword, or scimitar, sheathed in a scabbard of gold and ivory,
hung by the left side of the stranger, the ornamented hilt of which
appeared much too small for the large-jointed hand of the young
Hercules who was thus gaily attired. A dress, purple in colour, and
setting close to the limbs, covered the body of the soldier to a little
above the knee; from thence the knees and legs were bare to the calf,
to which the reticulated strings of the sandals rose from the instep,
the ligatures being there fixed by a golden coin of the reigning
Emperor, converted into a species of clasp for the purpose.

But a weapon which seemed more particularly adapted to the young
barbarian's size, and incapable of being used by a man of less
formidable limbs and sinews, was a battle-axe, the firm iron-guarded
staff of which was formed of tough elm, strongly inlaid and defended
with brass, while many a plate and ring were indented in the handle, to
hold the wood and the steel parts together. The axe itself was composed
of two blades, turning different ways, with a sharp steel spike
projecting from between them. The steel part, both spike and blade, was
burnished as bright as a mirror; and though its ponderous size must
have been burdensome to one weaker than himself, yet the young soldier
carried it as carelessly along, as if it were but a feather's weight.
It was, indeed, a skilfully constructed weapon, so well balanced, that
it was much lighter in striking and in recovery, than he who saw it in
the hands of another could easily have believed.

The carrying arms of itself showed that the military man was a
stranger. The native Greeks had that mark of a civilized people, that
they never bore weapons during the time of peace, unless the wearer
chanced to be numbered among those whose military profession and
employment required them to be always in arms. Such soldiers by
profession were easily distinguished from the peaceful citizens; and it
was with some evident show of fear as well as dislike, that the
passengers observed to each other, that the stranger was a Varangian,
an expression which intimated a barbarian of the imperial body-guard.

To supply the deficiency of valour among his own subjects, and to
procure soldiers who should be personally dependent on the Emperor, the
Greek sovereigns had been, for a great many years, in the custom of
maintaining in their pay, as near their person as they could, the
steady services of a select number of mercenaries in the capacity of
body-guards, which were numerous enough, when their steady discipline
and inflexible loyalty were taken in conjunction with their personal
strength and indomitable courage, to defeat, not only any traitorous
attempt on the imperial person, but to quell open rebellions, unless
such were supported by a great proportion of the military force. Their
pay was therefore liberal; their rank and established character for
prowess gave them a degree of consideration among the people, whose
reputation for valour had not for some ages stood high; and if, as
foreigners, and the members of a privileged body, the Varangians were
sometimes employed in arbitrary and unpopular services, the natives
were so apt to fear, while they disliked them, that the hardy strangers
disturbed themselves but little about the light in which they were
regarded by the inhabitants of Constantinople. Their dress and
accoutrements, while within the city, partook of the rich, or rather
gaudy costume, which we have described, bearing only a sort of affected
resemblance to that which the Varangians wore in their native forests.
But the individuals of this select corps were, when their services were
required beyond the city, furnished with armour and weapons more
resembling those which they were accustomed to wield in their own
country, possessing much less of the splendour of war, and a far
greater portion of its effective terrors; and thus they were summoned
to take the field.

This body of Varangians (which term is, according to one interpretation
merely a general expression for barbarians) was, in an early age of the
empire, formed of the roving and piratical inhabitants of the north,
whom a love of adventure, the greatest perhaps that ever was indulged,
and a contempt of danger, which never had a parallel in the history of
human nature, drove forth upon the pathless ocean. "Piracy," says
Gibbon, with his usual spirit, "was the exercise, the trade, the glory,
and the virtue of the Scandinavian youth. Impatient of a bleak climate
and narrow limits, they started from the banquet, grasped their arms,
sounded their horn, ascended their ships, and explored every coast that
promised either spoil or settlement." [Footnote: Decline and Fall of
the Roman Empire. Chap. lv. vol. x. p. 221, 8vo edition.]

The conquests made in France and Britain by these wild sea-kings, as
they were called, have obscured the remembrance of other northern
champions, who, long before the time of Comnenus, made excursions as
far as Constantinople, and witnessed with their own eyes the wealth and
the weakness of the Grecian empire itself. Numbers found their way
thither through the pathless wastes of Russia; others navigated the
Mediterranean in their sea-serpents, as they termed their piratical
vessels. The Emperors, terrified at the appearance of these daring
inhabitants of the frozen zone, had recourse to the usual policy of a
rich and unwarlike people, bought with gold the service of their
swords, and thus formed a corps of satellites more distinguished for
valour than the famed Praetorian Bands of Rome, and, perhaps because
fewer in number, unalterably loyal to their new princes.

But, at a later period of the empire, it began to be more difficult for
the Emperors to obtain recruits for their favourite and selected corps,
the northern nations having now in a great measure laid aside the
piratical and roving habits, which had driven their ancestors from the
straits of Elsinore to those of Sestos and Abydos. The corps of the
Varangians must therefore have died out, or have been filled up with
less worthy materials, had not the conquests made by the Normans in the
far distant west, sent to the aid of Comnenus a large body of the
dispossessed inhabitants of the islands of Britain, and particularly of
England, who furnished recruits to his chosen body-guard. These were,
in fact, Anglo-Saxons; but, in the confused idea of geography received
at the court of Constantinople, they were naturally enough called
Anglo-Danes, as their native country was confounded with the Thule of
the ancients, by which expression the archipelago of Zetland and Orkney
is properly to be understood, though, according to the notions of the
Greeks, it comprised either Denmark or Britain. The emigrants, however,
spoke a language not very dissimilar to the original Varangians, and
adopted the name more readily, that it seemed to remind them of their
unhappy fate, the appellation being in one sense capable of being
interpreted as exiles. Excepting one or two chief commanders, whom the
Emperor judged worthy of such high trust, the Varangians were officered
by men of their own nation; and with so many privileges, being joined
by many of their countrymen from time to time, as the crusades,
pilgrimages, or discontent at home, drove fresh supplies of the
Anglo-Saxons, or Anglo-Danes, to the east, the Varangians subsisted in
strength to the last days of the Greek empire, retaining their native
language, along with the unblemished loyalty, and unabated martial
spirit, which characterised their fathers.

This account of the Varangian Guard is strictly historical, and might
be proved by reference to the Byzantine historians; most of whom, and
also Villehardouin's account of the taking of the city of
Constantinople by the Franks and Venetians, make repeated mention of
this celebrated and singular body of Englishmen, forming a mercenary
guard attendant on the person of the Greek Emperors. [Footnote: Ducange
has poured forth a tide of learning on this curious subject, which will
be found in his Notes on Villehardouin's Constantinople under the
French Emperors.--Paris, 1637, folio, p. 196. Gibbon's History may also
be consulted, vol. x. p. 231.

Villehardouin, in describing the siege of Constantinople, A. D. 1203,
says, "'Li murs fu mult garnis d'Anglois et de Danois,"--hence the
dissertation of Ducange here quoted, and several articles besides in
his Glossarium, as _Varangi_, Warengangi, &c. The etymology of the name
is left uncertain, though the German _fort-ganger_, _i. e._ forth-goer,
wanderer, _exile_, seems the most probable. The term occurs in various
Italian and Sicilian documents, anterior to the establishment of the
Varangian Guards at Constantinople, and collected by Muratori: as, for
instance, in an edict of one of the Lombard kings, "Omnes Warengrangi,
qui de extens finibus in regni nostri finibus advenerint seque sub
scuto potestatis nostrae subdiderint, legibus nostris Longobardorum
vivere debeant,"--and in another, "De Warengangis, nobilibus,
mediocribus, et rusticis hominibus, qui usque nune in terra vestra
fugiti sunt, habeatis eos."--_Muratori_, vol. ii. p. 261.

With regard to the origin of the Varangian Guard, the most distinct
testimony is that of Ordericus Vittalis, who says, "When therefore the
English had lost their liberty, they turned themselves with zeal to
discover the means of throwing off the unaccustomed yoke. Some fled to
Sueno, King of the Danes, to excite him to the recovery of the
inheritance of his grandfather, Canute. Not a few fled into exile in
other regions, either from the mere desire of escaping from under the
Norman rule, or in the hope of acquiring wealth, and so being one day
in a condition to renew the struggle at home. Some of these, in the
bloom of youth, penetrated into a far distant land, and offered
themselves to the military service of the Constantinopolitan
Emperor--that wise prince, against whom Robert Guiscard, Duke of
Apulia, had then raised all his forces. The English exiles were
favourably received, and opposed in battle to the Normans, for whose
encounter the Greeks themselves were too weak. Alexius began to build a
town for the English, a little above Constantinople, at a place called
_Chevelot_, but the trouble of the Normans from Sicily still
increasing, he soon recalled them to the capital, and intrusted the
princial palace with all its treasures to their keeping. This was the
method in which the Saxon English found their way to Ionia, where they
still remain, highly valued by the Emperor and the people."--Book iv.
p. 508.]

Having said enough to explain why an individual Varangian should be
strolling about the Golden Gate, we may proceed in the story which we
have commenced.

Let it not be thought extraordinary, that this soldier of the
life-guard should be looked upon with some degree of curiosity by the
passing citizens. It must be supposed, that, from their peculiar
duties, they were not encouraged to hold frequent intercourse or
communication with the inhabitants; and, besides that they had duties
of police occasionally to exercise amongst them, which made them
generally more dreaded than beloved, they were at the same time
conscious, that their high pay, splendid appointments, and immediate
dependence on the Emperor, were subjects of envy to the other forces.
They, therefore, kept much in the neighbourhood of their own barracks,
and were seldom seen straggling remote from them, unless they had a
commission of government intrusted to their charge.

This being the case, it was natural that a people so curious as the
Greeks should busy themselves in eyeing the stranger as he loitered in
one spot, or wandered to and fro, like a man who either could not find
some place which he was seeking, or had failed to meet some person with
whom he had an appointment, for which the ingenuity of the passengers
found a thousand different and inconsistent reasons. "A Varangian,"
said one citizen to another, "and upon duty--ahem! Then I presume to
say in your ear"----

"What do you imagine is his object?" enquired the party to whom this
information was addressed.

"Gods and goddesses! do you think I can tell you? but suppose that he
is lurking here to hear what folk say of the Emperor," answered the
_quid-nunc_ of Constantinople.

"That is not likely,"' said the querist; "these Varangians do not speak
our language, and are not extremely well fitted for spies, since few of
them pretend to any intelligible notion of the Grecian tongue. It is
not likely, I think, that the Emperor would employ as a spy a man who
did not understand the language of the country."

"But if there are, as all men fancy," answered the politician, "persons
among these barbarian soldiers who can speak almost all languages, you
will admit that such are excellently qualified for seeing clearly
around them, since they possess the talent of beholding and reporting,
while no one has the slightest idea of suspecting them."

"It may well be," replied his companion; "but since we see so clearly
the fox's foot and paws protruding from beneath the seeming sheep's
fleece, or rather, by your leave, the _bear's_ hide yonder, had we not
better be jogging homeward, ere it be pretended we have insulted a
Varangian Guard?"

This surmise of danger insinuated by the last speaker, who was a much
older and more experienced politician than his friend, determined both
on a hasty retreat. They adjusted their cloaks, caught hold of each
other's arm, and, speaking fast and thick as they started new subjects
of suspicion, they sped, close coupled together, towards their
habitations, in a different and distant quarter of the town.

In the meantime, the sunset was nigh over; and the long shadows of the
walls, bulwarks, and arches, were projecting from the westward in
deeper and blacker shade. The Varangian seemed tired of the short and
lingering circle in which he had now trodden for more than an hour, and
in which he still loitered like an unliberated spirit, which cannot
leave the haunted spot till licensed by the spell which has brought it
hither. Even so the barbarian, casting an impatient glance to the sun,
which was setting in a blaze of light behind a rich grove of
cypress-trees, looked for some accommodation on the benches of stone
which were placed under shadow of the triumphal arch of Theodosius,
drew the axe, which was his principal weapon, close to his side,
wrapped his cloak about him, and, though his dress was not in other
respects a fit attire for slumber, any more than the place well
selected for repose, yet in less than three minutes he was fast asleep.
The irresistible impulse which induced him to seek for repose in a
place very indifferently fitted for the purpose, might be weariness
consequent upon the military vigils, which had proved a part of his
duty on the preceding evening. At the same time, his spirit was so
alive within him, even while he gave way to this transient fit of
oblivion, that he remained almost awake even with shut eyes, and no
hound ever seemed to sleep more lightly than our Anglo-Saxon at the
Golden Gate of Constantinople.

And now the slumberer, as the loiterer had been before, was the subject
of observation to the accidental passengers. Two men entered the porch
in company. One was a somewhat slight made, but alert-looking man, by
name Lysimachus, and by profession a designer. A roll of paper in his
hand, with a little satchel containing a few chalks, or pencils,
completed his stock in trade; and his acquaintance with the remains of
ancient art gave him a power of talking on the subject, which
unfortunately bore more than due proportion to his talents of
execution. His companion, a magnificent-looking man in form, and so far
resembling the young barbarian, but more clownish and peasant-like in
the expression of his features, was Stephanos the wrestler, well known
in the Palestra.

"Stop here, my friend," said the artist, producing his pencils, "till I
make a sketch for my youthful Hercules."

"I thought Hercules had been a Greek," said the wrestler. "This
sleeping animal is a barbarian."

The tone intimated some offence, and the designer hastened to soothe
the displeasure which he had thoughtlessly excited. Stephanos, known by
the surname of Castor, who was highly distinguished for gymnastic
exercises, was a sort of patron to the little artist, and not unlikely
by his own reputation to bring the talents of his friend into notice.

"Beauty and strength," said the adroit artist, "are of no particular
nation; and may our Muse never deign me her prize, but it is my
greatest pleasure to compare them, as existing in the uncultivated
savage of the north, and when they are found in the darling of an
enlightened people, who has added the height of gymnastic skill to the
most distinguished natural qualities, such as we can now only see in
the works of Phidias and Praxiteles--or in our living model of the
gymnastic champions of antiquity."

"Nay, I acknowledge that the Varangian is a proper man," said the
athletic hero, softening his tone; "but the poor savage hath not,
perhaps, in his lifetime, had a single drop of oil on his bosom!
Hercules instituted the Isthmian Games"---

"But hold! what sleeps he with, wrapt so close in his bear-skin?" said
the artist. "Is it a club?"

"Away, away, my friend!" cried Stephanos, as they looked closer on the
sleeper. "Do you not know that is the instrument of their barbarous
office? They do not war with swords or lances, as if destined to attack
men of flesh and blood; but with maces and axes, as if they were to
hack limbs formed of stone, and sinews of oak. I will wager my crown
[of withered parsley] that he lies here to arrest some distinguished
commander who has offended the government! He would not have been thus
formidably armed otherwise--Away, away, good Lysimachus; let us respect
the slumbers of the bear."

So saying, the champion of the Palestra made off with less apparent
confidence than his size and strength might have inspired.

Others, now thinly straggling, passed onward as the evening closed, and
the shadows of the cypress-trees fell darker around. Two females of the
lower rank cast their eyes on the sleeper. "Holy Maria!" said one, "if
he does not put me in mind of the Eastern tale, how the Genie brought a
gallant young prince from his nuptial chamber in Egypt, and left him
sleeping at the gate of Damascus. I will awake the poor lamb, lest he
catch harm from the night dew."

"Harm?" answered the older and crosser looking woman. "Ay, such harm as
the cold water of the Cydnus does to the wild-swan. A lamb?--ay,
forsooth! Why he's a wolf or a bear, at least a Varangian, and no
modest matron would exchange a word with such an unmannered barbarian.
I'll tell you what one of, these English Danes did to me"----

So saying, she drew on her companion, who followed with some
reluctance, seeming to listen to her gabble, while she looked back upon
the sleeper.

The total disappearance of the sun, and nearly at the same time the
departure of the twilight, which lasts so short time in that tropical
region--one of the few advantages which a more temperate climate
possesses over it, being the longer continuance of that sweet and
placid light--gave signal to the warders of the city to shut the
folding leaves of the Golden Gate, leaving a wicket lightly bolted for
the passage of those whom business might have detained too late without
the walls, and indeed for all who chose to pay a small coin. The
position and apparent insensibility of the Varangian did not escape
those who had charge of the gate, of whom there was a strong guard,
which belonged to the ordinary Greek forces.

"By Castor and by Pollux," said the centurion--for the Greeks swore by
the ancient deities, although they no longer worshipped them, and
preserved those military distinctions with which "the steady Romans
shook the world," although they were altogether degenerated from their
original manners--"By Castor and Pollux, comrades, we cannot gather
gold in this gate, according as its legend tells us: yet it will be our
fault if we cannot glean a goodly crop of silver; and though the golden
age be the most ancient and honourable, yet in this degenerate time it
is much if we see a glimpse of the inferior metal."

"Unworthy are we to follow the noble centurion Harpax," answered one of
the soldiers of the watch, who showed the shaven head and the single
tuft [Footnote: One tuft is left on the shaven head of the Moslem, for
the angel to grasp by when conveying him to Paradise.] of a Mussulman,
"if we do not hold silver a sufficient cause to bestir ourselves, when
there has been no gold to be had--as, by the faith of an honest man, I
think we can hardly tell its colour--whether out of the imperial
treasury, or obtained at the expense of individuals, for many long
moons !"

"But this silver," said the centurion, "thou shalt see with thine own
eye, and hear it ring a knell in the purse which holds our common
stock." "Which _did_ hold it, as thou wouldst say, most valiant
commander," replied the inferior warder; "but what that purse holds
now, save a few miserable oboli for purchasing certain pickled potherbs
and salt fish, to relish our allowance of stummed wine, I cannot tell,
but willingly give my share of the contents to the devil, if either
purse or platter exhibits symptom of any age richer than the age of
copper."

"I will replenish our treasury," said the centurion, "were our stock
yet lower than it is. Stand up close by the wicket, my masters. Bethink
you we are the Imperial Guards, or the guards of the Imperial City, it
is all one, and let us have no man rush past us on a sudden;--and now
that we are on our guard, I will unfold to you--But stop," said the
valiant centurion, "are we all here true brothers? Do all well
understand the ancient and laudable customs of our watch--keeping all
things secret which concern the profit and advantage of this our vigil,
and aiding and abetting the common cause, without information or
treachery?"

"You are strangely suspicious to-night," answered the sentinel.
"Methinks we have stood by you without tale-telling in matters which
were more weighty. Have you forgot the passage of the jeweller--which
was neither the gold nor silver age; but if there were a diamond one"--

"Peace, good Ismail the Infidel," said the centurion,--"for, I thank
Heaven, we are of all religions, so it is to be hoped we must have the
true one amongst us,--Peace, I say; it is unnecessary to prove thou
canst keep new secrets, by ripping up old ones. Come hither--look
through the wicket to the stone bench, on the shady side of the grand
porch--tell me, old lad, what dost thou see there?"

"A man asleep," said Ismail. "By Heaven, I think from what I can see by
the moonlight, that it is one of those barbarians, one of those island
dogs, whom the Emperor sets such store by!"

"And can thy fertile brain," said the centurion, "spin nothing out of
his present situation, tending towards our advantage?"

"Why, ay," said Ismail; "they have large pay, though they are not only
barbarians, but pagan dogs, in comparison with us Moslems and
Nazarenes. That fellow hath besotted himself with liquor, and hath not
found his way home to his barracks in good time. He will be severely
punished, unless we consent to admit him; and to prevail on us to do
so, he must empty the contents of his girdle."

"That, at least--that, at least," answered the soldiers of the city
watch, but carefully suppressing their voices, though they spoke in an
eager tone. "And is that all that you would make of such an
opportunity?" said Harpax, scornfully. "No, no, comrades. If this
outlandish animal indeed escape us, he must at least leave his fleece
behind. See you not the gleams from his headpiece and his cuirass? I
presume these betoken substantial silver, though it may be of the
thinnest. There lies the silver mine I spoke of, ready to enrich the
dexterous hands who shall labour it."

"But," said timidly a young Greek, a companion of their watch lately
enlisted in the corps, and unacquainted with their habits, "still this
barbarian, as you call him, is a soldier of the Emperor; and if we are
convicted of depriving him of his arms, we shall be justly punished for
a military crime."

"Hear to a new Lycurgus come to teach us our duty!" said the centurion.
"Learn first, young man, that the metropolitan cohort never can commit
a crime; and next, of course, that they can never be convicted of one.
Suppose we found a straggling barbarian, a Varangian, like this
slumberer, perhaps a Frank, or some other of these foreigners bearing
unpronounceable names, while they dishonour us by putting on the arms
and apparel of the real Roman soldier, are we, placed to defend an
important post, to admit a man so suspicious within our postern, when
the event may probably be to betray both the Golden Gate and the hearts
of gold who guard it,--to have the one seized, and the throats of the
others handsomely cut?"

"Keep him without side of the gate, then," replied the novice, "if you
think him so dangerous. For my part, I should not fear him, were he
deprived of that huge double-edged axe, which gleams from under his
cloak, having a more deadly glare than the comet which astrologers
prophesy such strange things of."

"Nay, then, we agree together," answered Harpax, "and you speak like a
youth of modesty and sense; and I promise you the state will lose
nothing in the despoiling of this same barbarian. Each of these savages
hath a double set of accoutrements, the one wrought with gold, silver,
inlaid work, and ivory, as becomes their duties in the prince's
household; the other fashioned of triple steel, strong, weighty, and
irresistible. Now, in taking from this suspicious character his silver
helmet and cuirass, you reduce him to his proper weapons, and you will
see him start up in arms fit for duty."

"Yes," said the novice; "but I do not see that this reasoning will do
more than warrant our stripping the Varangian of his armour, to be
afterwards heedfully returned to him on the morrow, if he prove a true
man. How, I know not, but I had adopted some idea that it was to be
confiscated for our joint behoof."

"Unquestionably," said Harpax; "for such has been the rule of our watch
ever since the days of the excellent centurion Sisyphus, in whose time
it first was determined, that all contraband commodities or suspicious
weapons, or the like, which were brought into the city during the
nightwatch, should be uniformly forfeited to the use of the soldiery of
the guard; and where the Emperor finds the goods or arms unjustly
seized, I hope he is rich enough to make it up to the sufferer."

"But still--but still," said Sebastes of Mitylene, the young Greek
aforesaid, "were the Emperor to discover"--

"Ass!" replied Harpax, "he cannot discover, if he had all the eyes of
Argus's tail.--Here are twelve of us sworn according to the rules of
the watch, to abide in the same story. Here is a barbarian, who, if he
remembers any thing of the matter--which I greatly doubt--his choice of
a lodging arguing his familiarity with the wine-pot--tells but a wild
tale of losing his armour, which we, my masters," (looking round to his
companions,) "deny stoutly--I hope we have courage enough for that--and
which party will be believed? The companions of the watch, surely!"

"Quite the contrary," said Sebastes. "I was born at a distance from
hence; yet even in the island of Mitylene, the rumour had reached me
that the cavaliers of the city-guard of Constantinople were so
accomplished in falsehood, that the oath of a single barbarian would
outweigh the Christian oath of the whole body, if Christians some of
them are--for example, this dark man with a single tuft on his head."

"And if it were even so," said the centurion, with a gloomy and
sinister look, "there is another way of making the transaction a safe
one."

Sebastes, fixing his eye on his commander, moved his hand to the hilt
of an Eastern poniard which he wore, as if to penetrate his exact
meaning. The centurion nodded in acquiescence.

"Young as I am," said Sebastes, "I have been already a pirate five
years at sea, and a robber three years now in the hills, and it is the
first time I have seen or heard a man hesitate, in such a case, to take
the only part which is worth a brave man's while to resort to in a
pressing affair."

Harpax struck his hand into that of the soldier, as sharing his
uncompromising sentiments; but when he spoke, it was in a tremulous
voice.

"How shall we deal with him?" said he to Sebastes, who, from the most
raw recruit in the corps, had now risen to the highest place in his
estimation.

"Any how," returned the islander; "I see bows here and shafts, and if
no other person can use them"--

"They are not," said the centurion, "the regular arms of our corps."

"The fitter you to guard the gates of a city," said the young soldier,
with a horse-laugh, which had something insulting in it. "Well--be it
so. I can shoot like a Scythian," he proceeded; "nod but with your
head, one shaft shall crash among the splinters of his skull and his
brains; the second shall quiver in his heart."

"Bravo, my noble comrade!" said Harpax, in a tone of affected rapture,
always lowering his voice, however, as respecting the slumbers of the
Varangian. "Such were the robbers of ancient days, the Diomedes,
Corvnetes, Synnes, Scyrons, Procrustes, whom it required demigods to
bring to what was miscalled justice, and whose compeers and fellows
will remain masters of the continent and isles of Greece, until
Hercules and Theseus shall again appear upon earth. Nevertheless, shoot
not, my valiant Sebastes--draw not the bow, my invaluable Mitylenian;
you may wound and not kill." "I am little wont to do so," said
Sebastes, again repeating the hoarse, chuckling, discordant laugh,
which grated upon the ears of the centurion, though he could hardly
tell the reason why it was so uncommonly unpleasant. "If I look not
about me," was his internal reflection, "we shall have two centurions
of the watch, instead of one. This Mitylenian, or be he who the devil
will, is a bow's length beyond me. I must keep my eye on him." He then
spoke aloud, in a tone of authority. "But, come, young man, it is hard
to discourage a young beginner. If you have been such a rover of wood
and river as you tell us of, you know how to play the Sicarius: there
lies your object, drunk or asleep, we know not which;--you will deal
with him in either case."

"Will you give me no odds to stab a stupefied or drunken man, most
noble centurion?" answered the Greek. "You would perhaps love the
commission yourself?" he continued, somewhat ironically.

"Do as you are directed, friend," said Harpax, pointing to the turret
staircase which led down from the battlement to the arched entrance
underneath the porch.

"He has the true cat-like stealthy pace," half muttered the centurion,
as his sentinel descended to do such a crime as he was posted there to
prevent. "This cockerel's comb must be cut, or he will become king of
the roost. But let us see if his hand be as resolute as his tongue;
then we will consider what turn to give to the conclusion."

As Harpax spoke between his teeth, and rather to himself than any of
his companions, the Mitylenian emerged from under the archway, treading
on tiptoe, yet swiftly, with an admirable mixture of silence and
celerity. His poniard, drawn as he descended, gleamed in his hand,
which was held a little behind the rest of his person, so as to conceal
it. The assassin hovered less than an instant over the sleeper, as if
to mark the interval between the ill-fated silver corslet, and the body
which it was designed to protect, when, at the instant the blow was
rushing to its descent, the Varangian started up at once, arrested the
armed hand of the assassin, by striking it upwards with the head of his
battle-axe; and while he thus parried the intended stab, struck the
Greek a blow heavier than Sebastes had ever learned at the Pancration,
which left him scarce the power to cry help to his comrades on the
battlements. They saw what had happened, however, and beheld the
barbarian set his foot on their companion, and brandish high his
formidable weapon, the whistling sound of which made the old arch ring
ominously, while he paused an instant, with his weapon upheaved, ere he
gave the finishing blow to his enemy. The warders made a bustle, as if
some of them would descend to the assistance of Sebastes, without,
however, appearing very eager to do so, when Harpax, in a rapid
whisper, commanded them to stand fast.

"Each man to his place," he said, "happen what may. Yonder comes a
captain of the guard--the secret is our own, if the savage has killed
the Mitylenian, as I well trust, for he stirs neither hand nor foot.
But if he lives, my comrades, make hard your faces as flints--he is but
one man, we are twelve. We know nothing of his purpose, save that he
went to see wherefore the barbarian slept so near the post."

While the centurion thus bruited his purpose in busy insinuation to the
companions of his watch, the stately figure of a tall soldier, richly
armed, and presenting a lofty crest, which glistened as he stept from
the open moonlight into the shade of the vault, became visible beneath.
A whisper passed among the warders on the top of the gate.

"Draw bolt, shut gate, come of the Mitylenian what will," said the
centurion; "we are lost men if we own him.--Here comes the chief of the
Varangian axes, the Follower himself."

"Well, Hereward," said the officer who came last upon the scene, in a
sort of _lingua Franca_, generally used by the barbarians of the guard,
"hast thou caught a night-hawk?"

"Ay, by Saint George!" answered the soldier; "and yet, in my country,
we would call him but a kite."

"What is he?" said the leader.

"He will tell you that himself," replied the Varangian, "when I take my
grasp from his windpipe."

"Let him go, then," said the officer.

The Englishman did as he was commanded; but, escaping as soon as he
felt himself at liberty, with an alertness which could scarce have been
anticipated, the Mitylenian rushed out at the arch, and, availing
himself of the complicated ornaments which had originally graced the
exterior of the gateway, he fled around buttress and projection,
closely pursued by the Varangian, who, encumbered with his armour, was
hardly a match in the course for the light-footed Grecian, as he dodged
his pursuer from one skulking place to another. The officer laughed
heartily, as the two figures, like shadows appearing and disappearing
as suddenly, held rapid flight and chase around the arch of Theodosius.

"By Hercules! it is Hector pursued round the walls of Ilion by
Achilles," said the officer; "but my Pelides will scarce overtake the
son of Priam. What, ho! goddess-born--son of the white-footed
Thetis!--But the allusion is lost on the poor savage--Hollo, Hereward!
I say, stop--know thine own most barbarous name." These last words were
muttered; then raising his voice, "Do not out-run thy wind, good
Hereward. Thou mayst have more occasion for breath to-night."

"If it had been my leader's will," answered the Varangian, coming back
in sulky mood, and breathing like one who had been at the top of his
speed, "I would have had him as fast as ever grey-hound held hare, ere
I left off the chase. Were it not for this foolish armour, which
encumbers without defending one, I would not have made two bounds
without taking him by the throat."

"As well as it is," said the officer, who was, in fact, the
Acoulonthos, or _Follower_, so called because it was the duty of this
highly-trusted officer of the Varangian Guards constantly to attend on
the person of the Emperor. "But let us now see by what means we are to
regain our entrance through the gate; for if, as I suspect, it was one
of those warders who was willing to have played thee a trick, his
companions may not let us enter willingly." "And is it not," said the
Varangian, "your Valour's duty to probe this want of discipline to the
bottom?"

"Hush thee here, my simple-minded savage! I have often told you, most
ignorant Hereward, that the skulls of those who come from your cold and
muddy Boentia of the North, are fitter to bear out twenty blows with a
sledge-hammer, than turn off one witty or ingenious idea. But follow
me, Hereward, and although I am aware that showing the fine meshes of
Grecian policy to the coarse eye of an unpractised barbarian like thee,
is much like casting pearls before swine, a thing forbidden in the
Blessed Gospel, yet, as thou hast so good a heart, and so trusty, as is
scarce to be met with among my Varangians themselves, I care not if,
while thou art in attendance on my person, I endeavour to indoctrinate
thee in some of that policy by which I myself--the Follower--the chief
of the Varangians, and therefore erected by their axes into the most
valiant of the valiant, am content to guide myself, although every way
qualified to bear me through the cross currents of the court by main
pull of oar and press of sail--a condescension in me, to do that by
policy, which no man in this imperial court, the chosen sphere of
superior wits, could so well accomplish by open force as myself. What
think'st thou, good savage?"

"I know," answered the Varangian, who walked about a step and a half
behind his leader, like an orderly of the present day behind his
officer's shoulder, "I should be sorry to trouble my head with what I
could do by my hands at once."

"Did I not say so?" replied the Follower, who had now for some minutes
led the way from the Golden Gate, and was seen gliding along the
outside of the moonlight walls, as if seeking an entrance elsewhere.
"Lo, such is the stuff of what you call your head is made! Your hands
and arms are perfect Ahitophels, compared to it. Hearken to me, thou
most ignorant of all animals,--but, for that very reason, thou stoutest
of confidants, and bravest of soldiers,--I will tell thee the very
riddle of this night-work, and yet, even then I doubt if thou canst
understand me."

"It is my present duty to try to comprehend your Valour," said the
Varangian--"I would say your policy, since you condescend to expound it
to me. As for your valour," he added, "I should be unlucky if I did not
think I understand its length and breadth already."

The Greek General coloured a little, but replied, with unaltered voice,
"True, good Hereward. We have seen each other in battle."

Hereward here could not suppress a short cough, which to those
grammarians of the day who were skilful in applying the use of accents,
would have implied no peculiar eulogium on his officer's military
bravery. Indeed, during their whole intercourse, the conversation of
the General, in spite of his tone of affected importance and
superiority, displayed an obvious respect for his companion, as one
who, in many points of action, might, if brought to the test, prove a
more effective soldier than himself. On the other hand, when the
powerful Northern warrior replied, although it was with all observance
of discipline and duty, yet the discussion might sometimes resemble
that between an ignorant macaroni officer, before the Duke of York's
reformation of the British army, and a steady sergeant of the regiment
in which they both served. There was a consciousness of superiority,
disguised by external respect, and half admitted by the leader.

"You will grant me, my simple friend," continued the chief, in the same
tone as before, "in order to lead thee by a short passage into the
deepest principle of policy which pervades this same court of
Constantinople, that the favour of the Emperor"--(here the officer
raised his casque, and the soldier made a semblance of doing so
also)--"who (be the place where he puts his foot sacred!) is the
vivifying principle of the sphere in which we live, as the sun itself
is that of humanity"----

"I have heard something like this said by our tribunes," said the
Varangian.

"It is their duty so to instruct you," answered the leader; "and I
trust that the priests also, in their sphere, forget not to teach my
Varangians their constant service to their Emperor."

"They do not omit it," replied the soldier, "though we of the exiles
know our duty."

"God forbid I should doubt it," said the commander of the battle-axes.
"All I mean is to make thee understand, my dear Hereward, that as there
are, though perhaps such do not exist in thy dark and gloomy climate, a
race of insects which are born in the first rays of the morning, and
expire with those of sunset, (thence called by us ephemeras, as
enduring one day only,) such is the case of a favourite at court, while
enjoying the smiles of the most sacred Emperor. And happy is he whose
favour, rising as the person of the sovereign emerges from the level
space which extends around the throne, displays itself in the first
imperial blaze of glory, and who, keeping his post during the meridian
splendour of the crown, has only the fate to disappear and die with the
last beam of imperial brightness."

"Your Valour," said the islander, "speaks higher language than my
Northern wits are able to comprehend. Only, methinks, rather than part
with life at the sunset, I would, since insect I must needs be, become
a moth for two or three dark hours."

"Such is the sordid desire of the vulgar, Hereward," answered the
Follower, with assumed superiority, "who are contented to enjoy life,
lacking distinction; whereas we, on the other hand, we of choicer
quality, who form the nearest and innermost circle around the Imperial
Alexius, in which he himself forms the central point, are watchful, to
woman's jealousy, of the distribution of his favours, and omit no
opportunity, whether by leaguing with or against each other, to
recommend ourselves individually to the peliar light of his
countenance."

"I think I comprehend what you mean," said the guardsman; "although as
for living such a life of intrigue--but that matters not."

"It does indeed matter not, my good Hereward," said his officer, "and
thou art lucky in having no appetite for the life I have described. Yet
have I seen barbarians rise high in the empire, and if they have not
altogether the flexibility, the malleability, as it is called--that
happy ductility which can give way to circumstances, I have yet known
those of barbaric tribes, especially if bred up at court from their
youth, who joined to a limited portion of this flexile quality enough
of a certain tough durability of temper, which, if it does not excel in
availing itself of opportunity, has no contemptible talent at creating
it. But letting comparisons pass, it follows, from this emulation of
glory, that is, of royal favour, amongst the servants of the imperial
and most sacred court, that each is desirous of distinguishing himself
by showing to the Emperor, not only that he fully understands the
duties of his own employments, but that he is capable, in case of
necessity, of discharging those of others."

"I understand," said the Saxon; "and thence it happens that the under
ministers, soldiers, and assistants of the great crown-officers, are
perpetually engaged, not in aiding each other, but in acting as spies
on their neighbours' actions?"

"Even so," answered the commander; "it is but few days since I had a
disagreeable instance of it. Every one, however dull in the intellect,
hath understood thus much, that the great Protospathaire, [Footnote:
Literally, the First Swordsman.] which title thou knowest signifies the
General-in-chief of the forces of the empire, hath me at hatred,
because I am the leader of those redoubtable Varangians, who enjoy and
well deserve, privileges exempting them from the absolute command which
he possesses over all other corps of the army--an authority which
becomes Nicanor, notwithstanding the victorious sound of his name,
nearly as well as a war-saddle would become a bullock."

"How!" said the Varangian, "does the Protospathaire pretend to any
authority over the noble exiles?--By the red dragon, under which we
will live and die, we will obey no man alive but Alexius Comnenus
himself, and our own officers!"

"Rightly and bravely resolved," said the leader; "but, my good
Hereward, let not your just indignation hurry you so far as to name the
most sacred Emperor, without raising your hand to your casque, and
adding the epithets of his lofty rank."

"I will raise my hand often enough and high enough," said the Norseman,
"when the Emperor's service requires it."

"I dare be sworn thou wilt," said Achilles Tatius, the commander of the
Varangian Imperial Body Guard, who thought the time was unfavourable
for distinguishing himself by insisting on that exact observance of
etiquette, which was one of his great pretensions to the name of a
soldier. "Yet were it not for the constant vigilance of your leader, my
child, the noble Varangians would be trode down, in the common mass of
the army, with the heathen cohorts of Huns, Scythians, or those
turban'd infidels the renegade Turks; and even for this is your
commander here in peril, because he vindicates his axe-men as worthy of
being prized above the paltry shafts of the Eastern tribes and the
javelins of the Moors, which are only fit to be playthings for
children."

"You are exposed to no danger," said the soldier, closing up to
Achilles in a confidential manner, "from which these axes can protect
you."

"Do I not know it?" said Achilles. "But it is to your arms alone that
the Follower of his most sacred Majesty now intrusts his safety."

"In aught that a soldier may do," answered Hereward; "make your own
computation, and then reckon this single arm worth two against any man
the Emperor has, not being of our own corps."

"Listen, my brave friend," continued Achilles. "This Nicanor was daring
enough to throw a reproach on our noble corps, accusing them--gods and
goddesses!--of plundering in the field, and, yet more sacrilegious, of
drinking the precious wine which was prepared for his most sacred
Majesty's own blessed consumption. I, the sacred person of the Emperor
being present, proceeded, as thou may'st well believe"--

"To give him the lie in his audacious throat!" burst in the
Varangian--"named a place of meeting somewhere in the vicinity, and
called the attendance of your poor follower, Hereward of Hampton, who
is your bond-slave for life long, for such an honour! I wish only you
had told me to get my work-day arms; but, however, I have my
battle-axe, and"--Here his companion seized a moment to break in, for
he was somewhat abashed at the lively tone of the young soldier.

"Hush thee, my son," said Achilles Tatius; "speak low, my excellent
Hereward. Thou mistakest this thing. With thee by my side, I would not,
indeed, hesitate to meet five such as Nicanor; but such is not the law
of this most hallowed empire, nor the sentiments of the three times
illustrious Prince who now rules it. Thou art debauched, my soldier,
with the swaggering stories of the Franks, of whom we hear more and
more every day."

"I would not willingly borrow any thing from those whom you call
Franks, and we Normans," answered the Varangian, in a disappointed,
dogged tone.

"Why, listen, then," said the officer as they proceeded on their walk,
"listen to the reason of the thing, and consider whether such a custom
can obtain, as that which they term the duello, in any country of
civilization and common sense, to say nothing of one which is blessed
with the domination of the most rare Alexius Comnenus. Two great lords,
or high officers, quarrel in the court, and before the reverend person
of the Emperor. They dispute about a point of fact. Now, instead of
each maintaining his own opinion by argument or evidence, suppose they
had adopted the custom of these barbarous Franks,--'Why, thou liest in
thy throat,' says the one; 'and thou liest in thy very lungs,' says
another; and they measure forth the lists of battle in the next meadow.
Each swears to the truth of his quarrel, though probably neither well
knows precisely how the fact stands. One, perhaps the hardier, truer,
and better man of the two, the Follower of the Emperor, and father of
the Varangians, (for death, my faithful follower, spares no man,) lies
dead on the ground, and the other comes back to predominate in the
court, where, had the matter been enquired into by the rules of common
sense and reason, the victor, as he is termed, would have been sent to
the gallows. And yet this is the law of arms, as your fancy pleases to
call it, friend Hereward!"

"May it please your Valour," answered the barbarian, "there is a show
of sense in what you say; but you will sooner convince me that this
blessed moonlight is the blackness of a wolf's mouth, than that I ought
to hear myself called liar, without cramming the epithet down the
speaker's throat with the spike of my battle-axe. The lie is to a man
the same as a blow, and a blow degrades him into a slave and a beast of
burden, if endured without retaliation."

"Ay, there it is!" said Achilles; "could I but get you to lay aside
that inborn barbarism, which leads you, otherwise the most disciplined
soldiers who serve the sacred Emperor, into such deadly quarrels and
feuds"--

"Sir Captain," said the Varangian, in a sullen tone, "take my advice,
and take the Varangians as you have them; for, believe my word, that if
you could teach them to endure reproaches, bear the lie, or tolerate
stripes, you would hardly find them, when their discipline is
completed, worth the single day's salt which they cost to his holiness,
if that be his title. I must tell you, moreover, valorous sir, that the
Varangians will little thank their leader, who heard them called
marauders, drunkards, and what not, and repelled not the charge on the
spot."

"Now, if I knew not the humours of my barbarians," thought Tatius, in
his own mind, "I should bring on myself a quarrel with these untamed
islanders, who the Emperor thinks can be so easily kept in discipline.
But I will settle this sport presently." Accordingly, he addressed the
Saxon in a soothing tone.

"My faithful soldier," he proceeded aloud, "we Romans, according to the
custom of our ancestors, set as much glory on actually telling the
truth, as you do in resenting the imputation of falsehood; and I could
not with honour return a charge of falsehood upon Nicanor, since what
he said was substantially true."

"What! that we Varangians were plunderers, drunkards, and the like?"
said Hereward, more impatient than before.

"No, surely, not in that broad sense," said Achilles; "but there was
too much foundation for the legend."

"When and where?" asked the Anglo-Saxon.

"You remember," replied his leader, "the long march near Laodicea,
where the Varangians beat off a cloud of Turks, and retook a train of
the imperial baggage? You know what was done that day--how you quenched
your thirst, I mean?"

"I have some reason to remember it," said Hereward of Hampton; "for we
were half choked with dust, fatigue, and, which was worst of all,
constantly fighting with our faces to the rear, when we found some
firkins of wine in certain carriages which were broken down--down our
throats it went, as if it had been the best ale in Southampton."

"Ah, unhappy!" said the Follower; "saw you not that the firkins were
stamped with the thrice excellent Grand Butler's own inviolable seal,
and set apart for the private use of his Imperial Majesty's most sacred
lips?"

"By good Saint George of merry England, worth a dozen of your Saint
George of Cappadocia, I neither thought nor cared about the matter,"
answered Hereward. "And I know your Valour drank a mighty draught
yourself out of my head-piece; not this silver bauble, but my
steel-cap, which is twice as ample. By the same token, that whereas
before you were giving orders to fall back, you were a changed man when
you had cleared your throat of the dust, and cried, 'Bide the other
brunt, my brave and stout boys of Britain!'"

"Ay," said Achilles, "I know I am but too apt to be venturous in
action. But you mistake, good Hereward; the wine I tasted in the
extremity of martial fatigue, was not that set apart for his sacred
Majesty's own peculiar mouth, but a secondary sort, preserved for the
Grand Butler himself, of which, as one of the great officers of the
household, I might right lawfully partake--the chance was nevertheless
sinfully unhappy."

"On my life," replied Hereward, "I cannot see the infelicity of
drinking when we are dying of thirst."

"But cheer up, my noble comrade," said Achilles, after he had hurried
over his own exculpation, and without noticing the Varangian's light
estimation of the crime, "his Imperial Majesty, in his ineffable
graciousness, imputes these ill-advised draughts as a crime to no one
who partook of them. He rebuked the Protospathaire for fishing up this
accusation, and said, when he had recalled the bustle and confusion of
that toilsome day, 'I thought myself well off amid that seven times
heated furnace, when we obtained a draught of the barley-wine drank by
my poor Varangians; and I drank their health, as well I might, since,
had it not been for their services, I had drunk my last; and well fare
their hearts, though they quaffed my wine in return!' And with that he
turned off, as one who said, 'I have too much of this, being a finding
of matter and ripping up of stories against Achilles Tatius and his
gallant Varangians.'"

"Now, may God bless his honest heart for it!" said Hereward, with more
downright heartiness than formal respect. "I'll drink to his health in
what I put next to my lips that quenches thirst, whether it may be ale,
wine, or ditch-water."

"Why, well said, but speak not above thy breath! and remember to put
thy hand to thy forehead, when naming, or even thinking of the
Emperor!--Well, thou knowest, Hereward, that having thus obtained the
advantage, I knew that the moment of a repulsed attack is always that
of a successful charge; and so I brought against the Protospathaire,
Nicanor, the robberies which have been committed at the Golden Gate,
and other entrances of the city, where a merchant was but of late
kidnapped and murdered, having on him certain jewels, the property of
the Patriarch."

"Ay! indeed?" said the Varangian; "and what said Alex--I mean the most
sacred Emperor, when he heard such things said of the city
warders?--though he had himself given, as we say in our land, the fox
the geese to keep."

"It may be he did," replied Achilles; "but he is a sovereign of deep
policy, and was resolved not to proceed against these treacherous
warders, or their general, the Protospathaire, without decisive proof.
His Sacred Majesty, therefore, charged me to obtain specific
circumstantial proof by thy means."

"And that I would have managed in two minutes, had you not called me
off the chase of yon cut-throat vagabond. But his grace knows the word
of a Varangian, and I can assure him that either lucre of my silver
gaberdine, which they nickname a cuirass, or the hatred of my corps,
would be sufficient to incite any of these knaves to cut the throat of
a Varangian, who appeared to be asleep.--So we go, I suppose, captain,
to bear evidence before the Emperor to this night's work?"

"No, my active soldier, hadst thou taken the runaway villain, my first
act must have been to set him free again; and my present charge to you
is, to forget that such an adventure has ever taken place."

"Ha!" said the Varangian; "this is a change of policy indeed!"

"Why, yes, brave Hereward; ere I left the palace this night, the
Patriarch made overtures of reconciliation betwixt me and the
Protospathaire, which, as our agreement is of much consequence to the
state, I could not very well reject, either as a good soldier or a good
Christian. All offences to my honour are to be in the fullest degree
repaid, for which the Patriarch interposes his warrant. The Emperor,
who will rather wink hard than see disagreements, loves better the
matter should be slurred over thus."

"And the reproaches upon the Varangians." said Hereward----

"Shall be fully retracted and atoned for," answered Achilles; "and a
weighty donative in gold dealt among the corps of the Anglo-Danish
axemen. Thou, my Hereward, mayst be distributor; and thus, if
well-managed, mayst plate thy battle-axe with gold."

"I love my axe better as it is," said the Varangian. "My father bore it
against the robber Normans at Hastings. Steel instead of gold for my
money."

"Thou mayst make thy choice, Hereward," answered his officer; "only, if
thou art poor, say the fault was thine own."

But here, in the course of their circuit round Constantinople, the
officer and his soldier came to a very small wicket or sallyport,
opening on the interior of a large and massive advanced work, which
terminated an entrance to the city itself. Here the officer halted, and
made his obedience, as a devotee who is about to enter a chapel of
peculiar sanctity.




CHAPTER THE THIRD.

     Here, youth, thy foot unbrace,
       Here, youth, thy brow unbraid;
     Each tribute that may grace
       The threshold here be paid.
     Walk with the stealthy pace
       Which Nature teaches deer,
     When, echoing in the chase,
       The hunter's horn they hear.
                          THE COURT.


Before entering, Achilles Tatius made various gesticulations, which
were imitated roughly and awkwardly by the unpractised Varangian, whose
service with his corps had been almost entirely in the field, his
routine of duty not having, till very lately, called him to serve as
one of the garrison of Constantinople. He was not, therefore,
acquainted with the minute observances which the Greeks, who were the
most formal and ceremonious soldiers and courtiers in the world,
rendered not merely to the Greek Emperor in person, but throughout the
sphere which peculiarly partook of his influence.

Achilles, having gesticulated after his own fashion, at length touched
the door with a rap, distinct at once and modest. This was thrice
repeated, when the captain whispered to his attendant, "The
interior!--for thy life, do as thou seest me do." At the same moment he
started back, and, stooping his head on his breast, with his hands over
his eyes, as if to save them from being dazzled by an expected burst of
light, awaited the answer to his summons. The Anglo-Dane, desirous to
obey his leader, imitating him as near as he could, stood side by side
in the posture of Oriental humiliation. The little portal opened
inwards, when no burst of light was seen, but four of the Varangians
were made visible in the entrance, holding each his battle-axe, as if
about to strike down the intruders who had disturbed the silence of
their watch.

"Acoulouthos," said the leader, by way of password.

"Tatius and Acoulouthos," murmured the warders, as a countersign.

Each sentinel sunk his weapon.

Achilles then reared his stately crest, with a conscious dignity at
making this display of court influence in the eyes of his soldiers.
Hereward observed an undisturbed gravity, to the surprise of his
officer, who marvelled in his own mind how he could be such a barbarian
as to regard with apathy a scene, which had in his eyes the most
impressive and peculiar awe. This indifference he imputed to the stupid
insensibility of his companion.

They passed on between the sentinels, who wheeled backward in file, on
each side of the portal, and gave the strangers entrance to a long
narrow plank, stretched across the city-moat, which was here drawn
within the enclosure of an external rampart, projecting beyond the
principal wall of the city.

"This," he whispered to Hereward, "is called the Bridge of Peril, and
it is said that it has been occasionally smeared with oil, or strewed
with dried peas, and that the bodies of men, known to have been in
company with the Emperor's most sacred person, have been taken out of
the Golden Horn, [Footnote: The harbour of Constantinople.] into which
the moat empties itself."

"I would not have thought," said the islander, raising his voice to its
usual rough tone, "that Alexius Comnenus"--

"Hush, rash and regardless of your life!" said Achilles Tatius; "to
awaken the daughter of the imperial arch, [Footnote: The daughter of
the arch was a courtly expression for the echo, as we find explained by
the courtly commander himself.] is to incur deep penalty at all times;
but when a rash delinquent has disturbed her with reflections on his
most sacred Highness the Emperor, death is a punishment far too light
for the effrontery which has interrupted her blessed slumber!--Ill hath
been my fate, to have positive commands laid on me, enjoining me to
bring into the sacred precincts a creature who hath no more of the salt
of civilization in him than to keep his mortal frame from corruption,
since of all mental culture he is totally incapable. Consider thyself,
Hereward, and bethink thee what thou art. By nature a poor
barbarian--thy best boast that thou hast slain certain Mussulmans in
thy sacred master's quarrel; and here art thou admitted into the
inviolable enclosure of the Blaquernal, and in the hearing not only of
the royal daughter of the imperial arch, which means," said the
eloquent leader, "the echo of the sublime vaults; but--Heaven be our
guide,--for what I know, within the natural hearing of the Sacred Ear
itself!"

"Well, my captain," replied the Varangian, "I cannot presume to speak
my mind after the fashion of this place; but I can easily suppose I am
but ill qualified to converse in the presence of the court, nor do I
mean therefore to say a word till I am spoken to, unless when I shall
see no better company than ourselves. To be plain, I find difficulty in
modelling my voice to a smoother tone than nature has given it. So,
henceforth, my brave captain, I will be mute, unless when you give me a
sign to speak."

"You will act wisely," said the captain. "Here be certain persons of
high rank, nay, some that have been born in the purple itself, that
will, Hereward, (alas, for thee!) prepare to sound with the line of
their courtly understanding the depths of thy barbarous and shallow
conceit. Do not, therefore, then, join their graceful smiles with thy
inhuman bursts of cachinnation, with which thou art wont to thunder
forth when opening in chorus with thy messmates."

"I tell thee I will be silent," said the Varangian, moved somewhat
beyond his mood. "If you trust my word, so; if you think I am a jackdaw
that must be speaking, whether in or out of place and purpose, I am
contented to go back again, and therein we can end the matter."

Achilles, conscious perhaps that it was his best policy not to drive
his subaltern to extremity, lowered his tone somewhat in reply to the
uncourtly note of the soldier, as if allowing something for the rude
manners of one whom he considered as not easily matched among the
Varangians themselves, for strength and valour; qualities which, in
despite of Hereward's discourtesy, Achilles suspected in his heart were
fully more valuable than all those nameless graces which a more courtly
and accomplished soldier might possess.

The expert navigator of the intricacies of the imperial residence,
carried the Varangian through two or three small complicated courts,
forming a part of the extensive Palace of the Blaquernal, [Footnote:
This palace derived its name from the neighbouring Blachernian Gate and
Bridge.] and entered the building itself by a side door--watched in
like manner by a sentinel of the Varangian Guard, whom they passed on
being recognized. In the next apartment was stationed the Court of
Guard, where were certain soldiers of the same corps amusing themselves
at games somewhat resembling the modern draughts and dice, while they
seasoned their pastime with frequent applications to deep flagons of
ale, which were furnished to them while passing away their hours of
duty. Some glances passed between Hereward and his comrades, and he
would have joined them, or at least spoke to them; for, since the
adventure of the Mitylenian, Hereward had rather thought himself
annoyed than distinguished by his moonlight ramble in the company of
his commander, excepting always the short and interesting period during
which he conceived they were on the way to fight a duel. Still, however
negligent in the strict observance of the ceremonies of the sacred
palace, the Varangians had, in their own way, rigid notions of
calculating their military duty; in consequence of which Hereward,
without speaking to his companions, followed his leader through the
guard-room, and one or two antechambers adjacent, the splendid and
luxurious furniture of which convinced him that he could be nowhere
else save in the sacred residence of his master the Emperor.

At length, having traversed passages and apartments with which the
captain seemed familiar, and which he threaded with a stealthy, silent,
and apparently reverential pace, as if, in his own inflated phrase,
afraid to awaken the sounding echoes of those lofty and monumental
halls, another species of inhabitants began to be visible. In different
entrances, and in different apartments, the northern soldier beheld
those unfortunate slaves, chiefly of African descent, raised
occasionally under the Emperors of Greece to great power and honours,
who, in that respect, imitated one of the most barbarous points of
Oriental despotism. These slaves were differently occupied; some
standing, as if on guard, at gates or in passages, with their drawn
sabres in their hands; some were sitting in the Oriental fashion, on
carpets, reposing themselves, or playing at various games, all of a
character profoundly silent. Not a word passed between the guide of
Hereward, and the withered and deformed beings whom they thus
encountered. The exchange of a glance with the principal soldier seemed
all that was necessary to ensure both an uninterrupted passage.

After making their way through several apartments, empty or thus
occupied, they, at length entered one of black marble, or some other
dark-coloured stone, much loftier and longer than the rest. Side
passages opened into it, so far as the islander could discern,
descending from several portals in the wall; but as the oils and gums
with which the lamps in these passages were fed diffused a dim vapour
around, it was difficult to ascertain, from the imperfect light, either
the shape of the hall, or the style of its architecture. At the upper
and lower ends of the chamber, there was a stronger and clearer light.
It was when they were in the middle of this huge and long apartment,
that Achilles said to the soldier, in the sort of cautionary whisper
which he appeared to have substituted in place of his natural voice
since he had crossed the Bridge of Peril--

"Remain here till I return, and stir from this hall on no account."

"To hear is to obey," answered the Varangian, an expression of
obedience, which, like many other phrases and fashions, the empire,
which still affected the name of Roman, had borrowed from the
barbarians of the East. Achilles Tatius then hastened up the steps
which led to one of the side-doors of the hall, which being slightly
pressed, its noiseless hinge gave way and admitted him.

Left alone to amuse himself as he best could, within the limits
permitted to him, the Varangian visited in succession both ends of the
hall, where the objects were more visible than elsewhere. The lower end
had in its centre a small low-browed door of iron. Over it was
displayed the Greek crucifix in bronze, and around and on every side,
the representation of shackles, fetter bolts, and the like, were also
executed in bronze, and disposed as appropriate ornaments over the
entrance. The door of the dark archway was half open, and Hereward
naturally looked in, the orders of his chief not prohibiting his
satisfying his curiosity thus far. A dense red light, more like a
distant spark than a lamp, affixed to the wall of what seemed a very
narrow and winding stair, resembling in shape and size a draw-well, the
verge of which opened on the threshold of the iron door, showed a
descent which seemed to conduct to the infernal regions. The Varangian,
however obtuse he might be considered by the quick-witted Greeks, had
no difficulty in comprehending that a staircase having such a gloomy
appearance, and the access to which was by a portal decorated in such a
melancholy style of architecture, could only lead to the dungeons of
the imperial palace, the size and complicated number of which were
neither the least remarkable, nor the least awe-imposing portion of the
sacred edifice. Listening profoundly, he even thought he caught such
accents as befit those graves of living men, the faint echoing of
groans and sighs, sounding as it were from the deep abyss beneath. But
in this respect his fancy probably filled up the sketch which his
conjectures bodied out.

"I have done nothing," he thought, "to merit being immured in one of
these subterranean dens. Surely though my captain, Achilles Tatius, is,
under favour, little better than an ass, he cannot be so false of word
as to train me to prison under false pretexts? I trow he shall first
see for the last time how the English axe plays, if such is to be the
sport of the evening. But let us see the upper end of this enormous
vault; it may bear a better omen."

Thus thinking, and not quite ruling the tramp of his armed footstep
according to the ceremonies of the place, the large-limbed Saxon strode
to the upper end of the black marble hall. The ornament of the portal
here was a small altar, like those in the temples of the heathen
deities, which projected above the centre of the arch. On this altar
smoked incense of some sort, the fumes of which rose curling in a thin
cloud to the roof, and thence extending through the hall, enveloped in
its column of smoke a singular emblem, of which the Varangian could
make nothing. It was the representation of two human arms and hands,
seeming to issue from the wall, having the palms extended and open, as
about to confer some boon on those who approached the altar. These arms
were formed of bronze, and being placed farther back than the altar
with its incense, were seen through the curling smoke by lamps so
disposed as to illuminate the whole archway. "The meaning of this,"
thought the simple barbarian, "I should well know how to explain, were
these fists clenched, and were the hall dedicated to the _pancration_,
which we call boxing; but as even these helpless Greeks use not their
hands without their fingers being closed, by St. George I can make out
nothing of their meaning."

At this instant Achilles entered the black marble hall at the same door
by which he had left it, and came up to his neophyte, as the Varangian
might be termed.

"Come with me now, Hereward, for here approaches the thick of the
onset. Now, display the utmost courage that thou canst summon up, for
believe me thy credit and name also depend on it."

"Fear nothing for either," said Hereward, "if the heart or hand of one
man can bear him through the adventure by the help of a toy like this."

"Keep thy voice low and submissive, I have told thee a score of times,"
said the leader, "and lower thine axe, which, as I bethink me, thou
hadst better leave in the outer apartment."

"With your leave, noble captain," replied Hereward, "I am unwilling to
lay aside my bread-winner. I am one of those awkward clowns who cannot
behave seemly unless I have something to occupy my hands, and my
faithful battle-axe comes most natural to me."

"Keep it then; but remember thou dash it not about according to thy
custom, nor bellow, nor shout, nor cry as in a battle-field; think of
the sacred character of the place, which exaggerates riot into
blasphemy, and remember the persons whom thou mayst chance to see, an
offence to some of whom, it may be, ranks in the same sense with
blasphemy against Heaven itself."

This lecture carried the tutor and the pupil so far as to the
side-door, and thence inducted them into a species of anteroom, from
which Achilles led his Varangian forward, until a pair of
folding-doors, opening into what proved to be a principal apartment of
the palace, exhibited to the rough-hewn native of the north a sight
equally new and surprising.

It was an apartment of the palace of the Blaquernal, dedicated to the
special service of the beloved daughter of the Emperor Alexius, the
Princess Anna Comnena, known to our times by her literary talents,
which record the history of her father's reign. She was seated, the
queen and sovereign of a literary circle, such as an imperial Princess,
porphyrogenita, or born in the sacred purple chamber itself, could
assemble in those days, and a glance around will enable us to form an
idea of her guests or companions.

The literary Princess herself had the bright eyes, straight features,
and comely and pleasing manners, which all would have allowed to the
Emperor's daughter, even if she could not have been, with severe truth,
said to have possessed them. She was placed upon a small bench, or
sofa, the fair sex here not being permitted to recline, as was the
fashion of the Roman ladies. A table before her was loaded with books,
plants, herbs, and drawings. She sat on a slight elevation, and those
who enjoyed the intimacy of the Princess, or to whom she wished to
speak in particular, were allowed, during such sublime colloquy, to
rest their knees on the little dais, or elevated place where her chair
found its station, in a posture half standing, half kneeling. Three
other seats, of different heights, were placed on the dais, and under
the same canopy of state which overshadowed that of the Princess Anna.

The first, which strictly resembled her own chair in size and
convenience, was one designed for her husband, Nicephorus Briennius. He
was said to entertain or affect the greatest respect for his wife's
erudition, though the courtiers were of opinion he would have liked to
absent himself from her evening parties more frequently than was
particularly agreeable to the Princess Anna and her imperial parents.
This was partly explained by the private tattle of the court, which
averred, that the Princess Anna Comnena had been more beautiful when
she was less learned; and that, though still a fine woman, she had
somewhat lost the charms of her person as she became enriched in her
mind.

To atone for the lowly fashion of the seat of Nicephorus Briennius, it
was placed as near to his princess as it could possibly be edged by the
ushers, so that she might not lose one look of her handsome spouse, nor
he the least particle of wisdom which might drop from the lips of his
erudite consort.

Two other seats of honour, or rather thrones,--for they had footstools
placed for the support of the feet, rests for the arms, and embroidered
pillows for the comfort of the back, not to mention the glories of the
outspreading canopy, were destined for the imperial couple, who
frequently attended their daughter's studies, which she prosecuted in
public in the way we have intimated. On such occasions, the Empress
Irene enjoyed the triumph peculiar to the mother of an accomplished
daughter, while Alexius, as it might happen, sometimes listened with
complacence to the rehearsal of his own exploits in the inflated
language of the Princess, and sometimes mildly nodded over her
dialogues upon the mysteries of philosophy, with the Patriarch Zosimus,
and other sages.

All these four distinguished seats for the persons of the Imperial
family, were occupied at the moment which we have described, excepting
that which ought to have been filled by Nicephorus Briennius, the
husband of the fair Anna Comnena. To his negligence and absence was
perhaps owing the angry spot on the brow of his fair bride. Beside her
on the platform were two white-robed nymphs of her household; female
slaves, in a word, who reposed themselves on their knees on cushions,
when their assistance was not wanted as a species of living book-desks,
to support and extend the parchment rolls, in which the Princess
recorded her own wisdom, or from which she quoted that of others. One
of these young maidens, called Astarte, was so distinguished as a
calligrapher, or beautiful writer of various alphabets and languages,
that she narrowly escaped being sent as a present to the Caliph, (who
could neither read nor write,) at a time when it was necessary to bribe
him into peace. Violante, usually called the Muse, the other attendant
of the Princess, a mistress of the vocal and instrumental art of music,
was actually sent in a compliment to soothe the temper of Robert
Guiscard, the Archduke of Apulia, who being aged and stone-deaf, and
the girl under ten years old at the time, returned the valued present
to the imperial donor, and, with the selfishness which was one of that
wily Norman's characteristics, desired to have some one sent him who
could contribute to his pleasure, instead of a twangling squalling
infant.

Beneath these elevated seats there sat, or reposed on the floor of the
hall, such favourites as were admitted. The Patriarch Zosimus, and one
or two old men, were permitted the use of certain lowly stools, which
were the only seats prepared for the learned members of the Princess's
evening parties, as they would have been called in our days. As for the
younger magnates, the honour of being permitted to join the imperial
conversation was expected to render them far superior to the paltry
accommodation of a joint-stool. Five or six courtiers, of different
dress and ages, might compose the party, who either stood, or relieved
their posture by kneeling, along the verge of an adorned fountain,
which shed a mist of such very small rain as to dispel almost
insensibly, cooling the fragrant breeze which breathed from the flowers
and shrubs, that were so disposed as to send a waste of sweets around.
One goodly old man, named Michael Agelastes, big, burly, and dressed
like an ancient Cynic philosopher, was distinguished by assuming, in a
great measure, the ragged garb and mad bearing of that sect, and by his
inflexible practice of the strictest ceremonies exigible by the
Imperial family. He was known by an affectation of cynical principle
and language, and of republican philosophy, strangely contradicted by
his practical deference to the great. It was wonderful how long this
man, now sixty years old and upwards, disdained to avail himself of the
accustomed privilege of leaning, or supporting his limbs, and with what
regularity he maintained either the standing posture or that of
absolute kneeling; but the first was so much his usual attitude, that
he acquired among his court friends the name of Elephas, or the
Elephant, because the ancients had an idea that the half-reasoning
animal, as it is called, has joints incapable of kneeling down.

"Yet I have seen them kneel when I was in the country of the
Gymnosophists," said a person present on the evening of Hereward's
introduction.

"To take up their master on their shoulders? so will ours," said the
Patriarch Zosimus, with the slight sneer which was the nearest advance
to a sarcasm that the etiquette of the Greek court permitted; for on
all ordinary occasions, it would not have offended the Presence more
surely, literally, to have drawn a poniard, than to exchange a repartee
in the imperial circle. Even the sarcasm, such as it was, would have
been thought censurable by that ceremonious court in any but the
Patriarch, to whose high rank some license was allowed.

Just as he had thus far offended decorum, Achilles Tatius, and his
soldier Hereward, entered the apartment. The former bore him with even
more than his usual degree of courtliness, as if to set his own
good-breeding off by a comparison with the inexpert bearing of his
follower; while, nevertheless, he had a secret pride in exhibiting, as
one under his own immediate and distinct command, a man whom he was
accustomed to consider as one of the finest soldiers of the army of
Alexius, whether appearance or reality were to be considered.

Some astonishment followed the abrupt entrance of the new comers.
Achilles indeed glided into the presence with the easy and quiet
extremity of respect which intimated his habitude in these regions. But
Hereward started on his entrance, and perceiving himself in company of
the court, hastily strove to remedy his disorder. His commander,
throwing round a scarce visible shrug of apology, made then a
confidential and monitory sign to Hereward to mind his conduct. What he
meant was, that he should doff his helmet and fall prostrate on the
ground. But the Anglo-Saxon, unaccustomed to interpret obscure
inferences, naturally thought of his military duties, and advanced in
front of the Emperor, as when he rendered his military homage. He made
reverence with his knee, half touched his cap, and then recovering and
shouldering his axe, stood in advance of the imperial chair, as if on
duty as a sentinel.

A gentle smile of surprise went round the circle as they gazed on the
manly appearance, and somewhat unceremonious but martial deportment of
the northern soldier. The various spectators around consulted the
Emperor's face, not knowing whether they were to take the intrusive
manner of the Varangian's entrance as matter of ill-breeding, and
manifest their horror, or whether they ought rather to consider the
bearing of the life-guardsman as indicating blunt and manly zeal, and
therefore to be received with applause.

It was some little time ere the Emperor recovered himself sufficiently
to strike a key-note, as was usual upon such occasions. Alexius
Comnenus had been wrapt for a moment into some species of slumber, or
at least absence of mind. Out of this he had been startled by the
sudden appearance of the Varangian; for though he was accustomed to
commit the outer guards of the palace to this trusty corps, yet the
deformed blacks whom we have mentioned, and who sometimes rose to be
ministers of state and commanders of armies, were, on all ordinary
occasions, intrusted with the guard of the interior of the palace.
Alexius, therefore, awakened from his slumber, and the military phrase
of his daughter still ringing in his ears as she was reading a
description of the great historical work, in which she had detailed the
conflicts of his reign, felt somewhat unprepared for the entrance and
military deportment of one of the Saxon guard, with whom he was
accustomed to associate, in general, scenes of blows, danger, and death.

After a troubled glance around, his look rested on Achilles Tatius.
"Why here," he said, "trusty Follower? why this soldier here at this
time of night?" Here, of course, was the moment for modelling the
visages _regis ad exemplum;_ but, ere the Patriarch could frame his
countenance into devout apprehension of danger, Achilles Tatius had
spoken a word or two, which reminded Alexius' memory that the soldier
had been brought there by his own special orders. "Oh, ay! true, good
fellow," said he, smoothing his troubled brow; "we had forgot that
passage among the cares of state." He then spoke to the Varangian with
a countenance more frank, and a heartier accent than he used to his
courtiers; for, to a despotic monarch, a faithful life-guardsman is a
person of confidence, while an officer of high rank is always in some
degree a subject of distrust. "Ha!" said he, "our worthy Anglo-Dane,
how fares he?"--This unceremonious salutation surprised all but him to
whom it was addressed. Hereward answered, accompanying his words with a
military obeisance which partook of heartiness rather than reverence,
with a loud unsubdued voice, which startled the presence still more
that the language was Saxon, which these foreigners occasionally used,
"_Waes hael Kaisar mirrig und machtigh!_"--that is, Be of good health,
stout and mighty Emperor. The Emperor, with a smile of intelligence, to
show he could speak to his guards in their own foreign language,
replied, by the well-known counter-signal--"_Drink hael!_'"

Immediately a page brought a silver goblet of wine. The Emperor put his
lips to it, though he scarce tasted the liquor, then commanded it to be
handed to Hereward, and bade the soldier drink. The Saxon did not wait
till he was desired a second time, but took off the contents without
hesitation. A gentle smile, decorous as the presence required, passed
over the assembly, at a feat which, though by no means wonderful in a
hyperborean, seemed prodigious in the estimation of the moderate
Greeks. Alexius himself laughed more loudly than his courtiers thought
might be becoming on their part, and mustering what few words of
Varangian he possessed, which he eked out with Greek, demanded of his
life-guardsman--"Well, my bold Briton, or Edward, as men call thee,
dost thou know the flavour of that wine?"

"Yes," answered the Varangian, without change of countenance, "I tasted
it once before at Laodicea"--

Here his officer, Achilles Tatius, became sensible that his soldier
approached delicate ground, and in vain endeavoured to gain his
attention, in order that he might furtively convey to him a hint to be
silent, or at least take heed what he said in such a presence. But the
soldier, who, with proper military observance, continued to have his
eye and attention fixed on the Emperor, as the prince whom he was bound
to answer or to serve, saw none of the hints, which Achilles at length
suffered to become so broad, that Zosimus and the Protospathaire
exchanged expressive glances, as calling on each other to notice the
by-play of the leader of the Varangians. In the meanwhile, the dialogue
between the Emperor and his soldier continued:--"How," said Alexius,
"did this draught relish compared with the former?"

"There is fairer company here, my liege, than that of the Arabian
archers," answered Hereward, with a look and bow of instinctive
good-breeding; "Nevertheless, there lacks the flavour which the heat of
the sun, the dust of the combat, with the fatigue of wielding such a
weapon as this" (advancing his axe) "for eight hours together, give to
a cup of rare wine."

"Another deficiency there might be," said Agelastes the Elephant,
"provided I am pardoned hinting at it," he added, with a look to the
throne,--"it might be the smaller size of the cup compared with that at
Laodicea." "By Taranis, you say true," answered the life-guardsman; "at
Laodicea I used my helmet."

"Let us see the cups compared together, good friend," said Agelastes,
continuing his raillery, "that we may be sure thou hast not swallowed
the present goblet; for I thought, from the manner of the draught,
there was a chance of its going down with its contents."

"There are some things which I do not easily swallow," answered the
Varangian, in a calm and indifferent tone; "but they must come from a
younger and more active man than you."

The company again smiled to each other, as if to hint that the
philosopher, though also parcel wit by profession, had the worst of the
encounter. The Emperor at the same time interfered--"Nor did I send for
thee hither, good fellow, to be baited by idle taunts."

Here Agelastes shrunk back in the circle, as a hound that has been
rebuked by the huntsman for babbling--and the Princess Anna Comnena,
who had indicated by her fair features a certain degree of impatience,
at length spoke--"Will it then please you, my imperial and much-beloved
father, to inform those blessed with admission to the Muses' temple,
for what it is that you have ordered this soldier to be this night
admitted to a place so far above his rank in life? Permit me to say, we
ought not to waste, in frivolous and silly jests, the time which is
sacred to the welfare of the empire, as every moment of your leisure
must be."

"Our daughter speaks wisely," said the Empress Irene, who, like most
mothers who do not possess much talent themselves, and are not very
capable of estimating it in others, was, nevertheless, a great admirer
of her favourite daughter's accomplishments, and ready to draw them out
on all occasions. "Permit me to remark, that in this divine and
selected palace of the Muses, dedicated to the studies of our
well-beloved and highly-gifted daughter, whose pen will preserve your
reputation, our most imperial husband, till the desolation of the
universe, and which enlivens and delights this society, the very flower
of the wits of our sublime court;--permit me to say, that we have,
merely by admitting a single life-guardsman, given our conversation the
character of that which distinguishes a barrack."

Now the Emperor Alexius Comnenus had the same feeling with many an
honest man in ordinary life when his wife begins a long oration,
especially as the Empress Irene did not always retain the observance
consistent with his awful rule and right supremacy, although especially
severe in exacting it from all others, in reference to her lord.
Therefore, though, he had felt some pleasure in gaining a short release
from the monotonous recitation of the Princess's history, he now saw
the necessity of resuming it, or of listening to the matrimonial
eloquence of the Empress. He sighed, therefore, as he said, "I crave
your pardon, good our imperial spouse, and our daughter born in the
purple chamber. I remember me, our most amiable and accomplished
daughter, that last night you wished to know the particulars of the
battle of Laodicea, with the heathenish Arabs, whom Heaven confound.
And for certain considerations which moved ourselves to add other
enquiries to our own recollection, Achilles Tatius, our most trusty
Follower, was commissioned to introduce into this place one of those
soldiers under his command, being such a one whose courage and presence
of mind could best enable him to remark what passed around him on that
remarkable and bloody day. And this I suppose to be the man brought to
us for that purpose."

"If I am permitted to speak, and live," answered the Follower, "your
Imperial Highness, with those divine Princesses, whose name is to us as
those of blessed saints, have in your presence the flower of my
Anglo-Danes, or whatsoever unbaptized name is given to my soldiers. He
is, as I may say, a barbarian of barbarians; for, although in birth and
breeding unfit to soil with his feet the carpet of this precinct of
accomplishment and eloquence, he is so brave--so trusty--so devotedly
attached--and so unhesitatingly zealous, that"--

"Enough, good Follower," said the Emperor; "let us only know that he is
cool and observant, not confused and fluttered during close battle, as
we have sometimes observed in you and other great commanders--and, to
speak truth, have even felt in our imperial self on extraordinary
occasions. Which difference in man's constitution is not owing to any
inferiority of courage, but, in us, to a certain consciousness of the
importance of our own safety to the welfare of the whole, and to a
feeling of the number of duties which at once devolve on us. Speak
then, and speak quickly, Tatius; for I discern that our dearest
consort, and our thrice fortunate daughter born in the imperial chamber
of purple, seem to wax somewhat impatient."

"Hereward," answered Tatius, "is as composed and observant in battle,
as another in a festive dance. The dust of war is the breath of his
nostrils; and he will prove his worth in combat against any four
others, (Varangians excepted,) who shall term themselves your Imperial
Highness's bravest servants."

"Follower," said the Emperor, with a displeased look and tone, "instead
of instructing these poor, ignorant barbarians in the rules and
civilization of our enlightened empire, you foster, by such boastful
words, the idle pride and fury of their temper, which hurries them into
brawls with the legions of other foreign countries, and even breeds
quarrels among themselves."

"If my mouth may be opened in the way of most humble excuse," said the
Follower, "I would presume to reply, that I but an hour hence talked
with this poor ignorant Anglo-Dane, on the paternal care with which the
Imperial Majesty of Greece regards the preservation of that concord
which unites the followers of his standard, and how desirous he is to
promote that harmony, more especially amongst the various nations who
have the happiness to serve you, in spite of the bloodthirsty quarrels
of the Franks, and other northern men, who are never free from civil
broil. I think the poor youth's understanding can bear witness to this
much in my behalf." He then looked towards Hereward, who gravely
inclined his head in token of assent to what his captain said. His
excuse thus ratified, Achilles proceeded in his apology more firmly.
"What I have said even now was spoken without consideration; for,
instead of pretending that this Hereward would face four of your
Imperial Highness's servants, I ought to have said, that he was willing
to defy six of your Imperial Majesty's most deadly _enemies_, and
permit them to choose every circumstance of time, arms, and place of
combat."

"That hath a better sound," said the Emperor; "and in truth, for the
information of my dearest daughter, who piously has undertaken to
record the things which I have been the blessed means of doing for the
Empire, I earnestly wish that she should remember, that though the
sword of Alexius hath not slept in its sheath, yet he hath never sought
his own aggrandizement of fame at the price of bloodshed among his
subjects."

"I trust," said Anna Comnena, "that in my humble sketch of the life of
the princely sire from whom I derive my existence, I have not forgot to
notice his love of peace, and care for the lives of his soldiery, and
abhorrence of the bloody manners of the heretic Franks, as one of his
most distinguishing characteristics."

Assuming then an attitude more commanding, as one who was about to
claim the attention of the company, the Princess inclined her head
gently around to the audience, and taking a roll of parchment from the
fair amanuensis, which she had, in a most beautiful handwriting,
engrossed to her mistress's dictation, Anna Comnena prepared to read
its contents.

At this moment, the eyes of the Princess rested for an instant on the
barbarian Hereward, to whom she deigned this greeting--"Valiant
barbarian, of whom my fancy recalls some memory, as if in a dream, thou
art now to hear a work, which, if the author be put into comparison
with the subject, might be likened to a portrait of Alexander, in
executing which, some inferior dauber has usurped the pencil of
Apelles; but which essay, however it may appear unworthy of the subject
in the eyes of many, must yet command some envy in those who candidly
consider its contents, and the difficulty of portraying the great
personage concerning whom it is written. Still, I pray thee, give thine
attention to what I have now to read, since this account of the battle
of Laodicea, the details thereof being principally derived from his
Imperial Highness, my excellent father, from the altogether valiant
Protospathaire, his invincible general, together with Achilles Tatius,
the faithful Follower of our victorious Emperor, may nevertheless be in
some circumstances inaccurate. For it is to be thought, that the high
offices of those great commanders retained them at a distance from some
particularly active parts of the fray, in order that they might have
more cool and accurate opportunity to form a judgment upon the whole,
and transmit their orders, without being disturbed by any thoughts of
personal safety. Even so, brave barbarian, in the art of embroidery,
(marvel not that we are a proficient in that mechanical process, since
it is patronized by Minerva, whose studies we affect to follow,) we
reserve to ourselves the superintendence of the entire web, and commit
to our maidens and others the execution of particular parts. Thus, in
the same manner, thou, valiant Varangian, being engaged in the very
thickest of the affray before Laodicea, mayst point out to us, the
unworthy historian of so renowned a war, those chances which befell
where men fought hand to hand, and where the fate of war was decided by
the edge of the sword. Therefore, dread not, thou bravest of the
axe-men to whom we owe that victory, and so many others, to correct any
mistake or misapprehension which we may have been led into concerning
the details of that glorious event."

"Madam," said the Varangian, "I shall attend with diligence to what
your Highness may be pleased to read to me; although, as to presuming
to blame the history of a Princess born in the purple, far be such a
presumption from me; still less would it become a barbaric Varangian to
pass a judgment on the military conduct of the Emperor, by whom he is
liberally paid, or of the commander, by whom he is well treated. Before
an action, if our advice is required, it is ever faithfully tendered;
but according to my rough wit, our censure after the field is fought
would be more invidious than useful. Touching the Protospathaire, if it
be the duty of a general to absent himself from close action, I can
safely say, or swear, were it necessary, that the invincible commander
was never seen by me within a javelin's cast of aught that looked like
danger."

This speech, boldly and bluntly delivered, had a general effect on the
company present. The Emperor himself, and Achilles Tatius, looked like
men who had got off from a danger better than they expected. The
Protospathaire laboured to conceal a movement of resentment. Agelastes
whispered to the Patriarch, near whom he was placed, "The northern
battle-axe lacks neither point nor edge."

"Hush!" said Zosimus, "let us hear how this is to end; the Princess is
about to speak."




CHAPTER THE FOURTH.

     We heard the Tecbir, so these Arabs call
     Their shout of onset, when with loud acclaim
     They challenged Heaven, as if demanding conquest.
     The battle join'd, and through the barb'rous herd,
     Fight, fight! and Paradise was all their cry.
                               THE SIEGE OF DAMASCUS.


The voice of the northern soldier, although modified by feelings of
respect to the Emperor, and even attachment to his captain, had more of
a tone of blunt sincerity, nevertheless, than was usually heard by the
sacred echoes of the imperial palace; and though the Princess Anna
Comnena began to think that she had invoked the opinion of a severe
judge, she was sensible, at the same time, by the deference of his
manner, that his respect was of a character more real, and his
applause, should she gain it, would prove more truly flattering, than
the gilded assent of the whole court of her father. She gazed with some
surprise and attention on Hereward, already described as a very
handsome young man, and felt the natural desire to please, which is
easily created in the mind towards a fine person of the other sex. His
attitude was easy and bold, but neither clownish nor uncourtly. His
title of a barbarian, placed him at once free from the forms of
civilized life, and the rules of artificial politeness. But his
character for valour, and the noble self-confidence of his bearing,
gave him a deeper interest than would have been acquired by a more
studied and anxious address, or an excess of reverential awe.

In short, the Princess Anna Comnena, high in rank as she was, and born
in the imperial purple, which she herself deemed the first of all
attributes, felt herself, nevertheless, in preparing to resume the
recitation of her history, more anxious to obtain the approbation of
this rude soldier, than that of all the rest of the courteous audience.
She knew them well, it is true, and felt nowise solicitous about the
applause which the daughter of the Emperor was sure to receive with
full hands from those of the Grecian court to whom she might choose to
communicate the productions of her father's daughter. But she had now a
judge of a new character, whose applause, if bestowed, must have
something in it intrinsically real, since it could only be obtained by
affecting his head or his heart.

It was perhaps under the influence of these feelings, that the Princess
was somewhat longer than usual in finding out the passage in the roll
of history at which she purposed to commence. It was also noticed, that
she began her recitation with a diffidence and embarrassment surprising
to the noble hearers, who had often seen her in full possession of her
presence of mind before what they conceived a more distinguished, and
even more critical audience.

Neither were the circumstances of the Varangian such as rendered the
scene indifferent to him. Anna Comnena had indeed attained her fifth
lustre, and that is a period after which Grecian beauty is understood
to commence its decline. How long she had passed that critical period,
was a secret to all but the trusted ward-women of the purple chamber.
Enough, that it was affirmed by the popular tongue, and seemed to be
attested by that bent towards philosophy and literature, which is not
supposed to be congenial to beauty in its earlier buds, to amount to
one or two years more. She might be seven-and-twenty.

Still Anna Comnena was, or had very lately been, a beauty of the very
first rank, and must be supposed to have still retained charms to
captivate a barbarian of the north; if, indeed, he himself was not
careful to maintain an heedful recollection of the immeasurable
distance between them. Indeed, even this recollection might hardly have
saved Hereward from the charms of this enchantress, bold, free-born,
and fearless as he was; for, during that time of strange revolutions,
there were many instances of successful generals sharing the couch of
imperial princesses, whom perhaps they had themselves rendered widows,
in order to make way for their own pretensions. But, besides the
influence of other recollections, which the reader may learn hereafter,
Hereward, though flattered by the unusual degree of attention which the
Princess bestowed upon him, saw in her only the daughter of his Emperor
and adopted liege lord, and the wife of a noble prince, whom reason and
duty alike forbade him to think of in any other light.

It was after one or two preliminary efforts that the Princess Anna
began her reading, with an uncertain voice, which gained strength and
fortitude as she proceeded with the following passage from a well-known
part of her history of Alexius Comnenus, but which unfortunately has
not been republished in the Byzantine historians. The narrative cannot,
therefore, be otherwise than acceptable to the antiquarian reader; and
the author hopes to receive the thanks of the learned world for the
recovery of a curious fragment, which, without his exertions, must
probably have passed to the gulf of total oblivion.




THE RETREAT OF LAODICEA.

NOW FIRST PUBLISHED FROM THE GREEK OF THE PRINCESS COMNENA'S HISTORY OF
HER FATHER.

"The sun had betaken himself to his bed in the ocean, ashamed, it would
seem, to see the immortal army of our most sacred Emperor Alexius
surrounded by those barbarous hordes of unbelieving barbarians, who, as
described in our last chapter, had occupied the various passes both in
front and rear of the Romans, [Footnote: More properly termed the
Greeks; but we follow the phraseology of the fair authoress.] secured
during the preceding night by the wily barbarians. Although, therefore,
a triumphant course of advance had brought us to this point, it now
became a serious and doubtful question whether our victorious eagles
might be able to penetrate any farther into the country of the enemy,
or even to retreat with safety into their own.

"The extensive acquaintance of the Emperor with military affairs, in
which he exceeds most living princes, had induced him, on the preceding
evening, to ascertain, with marvellous exactitude and foresight, the
precise position of the enemy. In this most necessary service he
employed certain light-armed barbarians, whose habits and discipline
had been originally derived from the wilds of Syria; and, if I am
required to speak according to the dictation of Truth, seeing she ought
always to sit upon the pen of a historian, I must needs say they were
infidels like their enemies; faithfully attached, however, to the Roman
service, and, as I believe, true slaves of the Emperor, to whom they
communicated the information required by him respecting the position of
his dreaded opponent Jezdegerd. These men did not bring in their
information till long after the hour when the Emperor usually betook
himself to rest.

"Notwithstanding this derangement of his most sacred time, our imperial
father, who had postponed the ceremony of disrobing, so important were
the necessities of the moment, continued, until deep in the night, to
hold a council of his wisest chiefs, men whose depth of judgment might
have saved a sinking world, and who now consulted what was to be done
under the pressure of the circumstances in which they were now placed.
And so great was the urgency, that all ordinary observances of the
household were set aside, since I have heard from those who witnessed
the fact, that the royal bed was displayed in the very room where the
council assembled, and that the sacred lamp, called the Light of the
Council, and which always burns when the Emperor presides in person
over the deliberations of his servants, was for that night--a thing
unknown in our annals--fed with unperfumed oil!!"

The fair speaker here threw her fine form into an attitude which
expressed holy horror, and the hearers intimated their sympathy in the
exciting cause by corresponding signs of interest; as to which we need
only say, that the sigh of Achilles Tatius was the most pathetic; while
the groan of Agelastes the Elephant was deepest and most tremendously
bestial in its sound. Hereward seemed little moved, except by a slight
motion of surprise at the wonder expressed by the others. The Princess,
having allowed due time for the sympathy of her hearers to exhibit
itself, proceeded as follows:--

"In this melancholy situation, when even the best-established and most
sacred rites of the imperial household gave way to the necessity of a
hasty provision for the morrow, the opinions of the counsellors were
different, according to their tempers and habits; a thing, by the way,
which may be remarked as likely to happen among the best and wisest on
such occasions of doubt and danger.

"I do not in this place put down the names and opinions of those whose
counsels were proposed and rejected, herein paying respect to the
secrecy and freedom of debate justly attached to the imperial cabinet.
Enough it is to say, that some there were who advised a speedy attack
upon the enemy, in the direction of our original advance. Others
thought it was safer, and might be easier, to force our way to the
rear, and retreat by the same course which had brought us hither; nor
must it be concealed, that there were persons of unsuspected fidelity,
who proposed a third course, safer indeed than the others, but totally
alien to the mind of our most magnanimous father. They recommended that
a confidential slave, in company with a minister of the interior of our
imperial palace, should be sent to the tent of Jezdegerd, in order to
ascertain upon what terms the barbarian would permit our triumphant
father to retreat in safety at the head of his victorious army. On
learning such opinion, our imperial father was heard to exclaim,
'Sancta Sophia!' being the nearest approach to an adjuration which he
has been known to permit himself, and was apparently about to say
something violent both concerning the dishonour of the advice, and the
cowardice of those by whom, it was preferred, when, recollecting the
mutability of human things, and the misfortune of several of his
Majesty's gracious predecessors, some of whom had been compelled to
surrender their sacred persons to the infidels in the same region, his
Imperial Majesty repressed his generous feelings, and only suffered his
army counsellors to understand his sentiments by a speech, in which he
declared so desperate and so dishonourable a course would be the last
which he would adopt, even in the last extremity of danger. Thus did
the judgment of this mighty Prince at once reject counsel that seemed
shameful to his arms, and thereby encourage the zeal of his troops,
while privately he kept this postern in reserve, which in utmost need
might serve for a safe, though not altogether, in less urgent
circumstances, an honourable retreat.

"When the discussion had reached this melancholy crisis, the renowned
Achilles Tatius arrived with the hopeful intelligence, that he himself
and some soldiers of his corps had discovered an opening on the left
flank of our present encampment, by which, making indeed a considerable
circuit, but reaching, if we marched with vigour, the town of Laodicea,
we might, by falling back on our resources, be in some measure in
surety from the enemy.

"So soon as this ray of hope darted on the troubled mind of our
gracious father, he proceeded to make such arrangements as might secure
the full benefit of the advantage. His Imperial Highness would not
permit the brave Varangians, whose battle-axes he accounted the flower
of his imperial army, to take the advanced posts of assailants on the
present occasion. He repressed the love of battle by which these
generous foreigners have been at all times distinguished, and directed
that the Syrian forces in the army, who have been before mentioned,
should be assembled with as little noise as possible in the vicinity of
the deserted pass, with instructions to occupy it. The good genius of
the empire suggested that, as their speech, arms, and appearance,
resembled those of the enemy, they might be permitted unopposed to take
post in the defile with their light-armed forces, and thus secure it
for the passage of the rest of the army, of which he proposed that the
Varangians, as immediately attached to his own sacred person, should
form the vanguard. The well-known battalions, termed the Immortals,
came next, comprising the gross of the army, and forming the centre and
rear. Achilles Tatius, the faithful Follower of his Royal Master,
although mortified that he was not permitted to assume the charge of
the rear, which he had proposed for himself and his valiant troops, as
the post of danger at the time, cheerfully acquiesced, nevertheless, in
the arrangement proposed by the Emperor, as most fit to effect the
imperial safety, and that of the army.

"The imperial orders, as they were sent instantly abroad, were in like
manner executed with the readiest punctuality, the rather that they
indicated a course of safety which had been almost despaired of even by
the oldest soldiers. During the dead period of time, when, as the
divine Homer tells us, gods and men are alike asleep, it was found that
the vigilance and prudence of a single individual had provided safety
for the whole Roman army. The pinnacles of the mountain passes were
scarcely touched by the earliest beams of the dawn, when these beams
were also reflected from the steel caps and spears of the Syrians,
under the command of a captain named Monastras, who, with his tribe,
had attached himself to the empire. The Emperor, at the head of his
faithful Varangians, defiled through the passes in order to gain that
degree of advance on the road to the city of Laodicea which was
desired, so as to avoid coming into collision with the barbarians.

"It was a goodly sight to see the dark mass of northern warriors, who
now led the van of the army, moving slowly and steadily through the
defiles of the mountains, around the insulated rocks and precipices,
and surmounting the gentler acclivities, like the course of a strong
and mighty river; while the loose bands of archers and javelin-men,
armed after the Eastern manner, were dispersed on the steep sides of
the defiles, and might be compared to light foam upon the edge of the
torrent. In the midst of the squadrons of the life-guard might be seen
the proud war-horse of his Imperial Majesty, which pawed the earth
indignantly, as if impatient at the delay which separated, him from his
august burden. The Emperor Alexius himself travelled in a litter, borne
by eight strong African slaves, that he might rise perfectly refreshed
if the army should be overtaken by the enemy. The valiant Achilles
Tatius rode near the couch of his master, that none of those luminous
ideas, by which our august sire so often decided the fate of battle,
might be lost for want of instant communication to those whose duty it
was to execute them. I may also say, that there were close to the
litter of the Emperor, three or four carriages of the same kind; one
prepared for the Moon, as she may be termed, of the universe, the
gracious Empress Irene. Among the others which might be mentioned, was
that which contained the authoress of this history, unworthy as she may
be of distinction, save as the daughter of the eminent and sacred
persons whom the narration chiefly concerns. In this manner the
imperial army pressed on through the dangerous defiles, where their
march was exposed to insults from the barbarians. They were happily
cleared without any opposition. When we came to the descent of the pass
which looks down on the city of Laodicea, the sagacity of the Emperor
commanded the van--which, though the soldiers composing the same were
heavily armed, had hitherto marched extremely fast--to halt, as well
that they themselves might take some repose and refreshment, as to give
the rearward forces time to come up, and close various gaps which the
rapid movement of those in front had occasioned in, the line of march.

"The place chosen for this purpose was eminently beautiful, from the
small and comparatively insignificant ridge of hills which melt
irregularly down into the plains stretching between the pass which we
occupied and Laodicea. The town was about one hundred stadia distant,
and some of our more sanguine warriors pretended that they could
already discern its towers and pinnacles, glittering in the early beams
of the sun, which had not as yet risen high into the horizon. A
mountain torrent, which found its source at the foot of a huge rock,
that yawned to give it birth, as if struck by the rod of the prophet
Moses, poured its liquid treasure down to the more level country,
nourishing herbage and even large trees, in its descent, until, at the
distance of some four or five miles, the stream, at least in dry
seasons, was lost amid heaps of sand and stones, which in the rainy
season marked the strength and fury of its current.

"It was pleasant to see the attention of the Emperor to the comforts of
the companions and guardians of his march. The trumpets from time to
time gave license to various parties of the Varangians to lay down
their arms, to eat the food which was distributed to them, and quench
their thirst at the pure stream, which poured its bounties down the
hill, or they might be seen to extend their bulky forms upon the turf
around them. The Emperor, his most serene spouse, arid the princesses
and ladies, were also served with breakfast, at the fountain formed by
the small brook in its very birth, and which the reverent feelings of
the soldiers had left unpolluted by vulgar touch, for the use of that
family, emphatically said to be born in the purple. Our beloved husband
was also present on this occasion, and was among the first to detect
one of the disasters of the day. For, although all the rest of the
repast had been, by the dexterity of the officers of the imperial
mouth, so arranged, even on so awful an occasion, as to exhibit little
difference from the ordinary provisions of the household, yet, when his
Imperial Highness called for wine, behold, not only was the sacred
liquor, dedicated to his own peculiar imperial use, wholly exhausted or
left behind, but, to use the language of Horace, not the vilest Sabine
vintage could be procured; so that his Imperial Highness was glad to
accept the offer of a rude Varangian, who proffered his modicum of
decocted barley, which these barbarians prefer to the juice of the
grape. The Emperor, nevertheless, accepted of this coarse tribute."

"Insert," said the Emperor, who had been hitherto either plunged in
deep contemplation or in an incipient slumber, "insert, I say, these
very words: 'And with the heat of the morning, and anxiety of so rapid
a march, with a numerous enemy in his rear, the Emperor was so thirsty,
as never in his life to think beverage more delicious.'"

In obedience to her imperial father's orders, the Princess resigned the
manuscript to the beautiful slave by whom it was written, repeating to
the fair scribe the commanded addition, requiring her to note it, as
made by the express sacred command of the Emperor, and then proceeded
thus:--"More had I said here respecting the favourite liquor of your
Imperial Highnesses faithful Varangians; but your Highness having once
graced it with a word of commendation, this _ail_, as they call it,
doubtless because removing all disorders, which they term 'ailments,'
becomes a theme too lofty for the discussion of any inferior person.
Suffice it to say, that thus were we all pleasantly engaged, the ladies
and slaves trying to find some amusement for the imperial ears; the
soldiers, in a long line down the ravine, seen in different postures,
some straggling to the watercourse, some keeping guard over the arms of
their comrades, in which duty they relieved each other, while body
after body of the remaining troops, under command of the
Protospathaire, and particularly those called Immortals, [Footnote: The
[Greek: Athanatoi], or Immortals, of the army of Constantinople, were a
select body, so named, in imitation of the ancient Persians. They were
first embodied, according to Ducange, by Michael Ducas] joined the main
army as they came up. Those soldiers who were already exhausted, were
allowed to take a short repose, after which they were sent forward,
with directions to advance steadily on the road to Laodicea; while
their leader was instructed, so soon as he should open a free
communication with that city, to send thither a command for
reinforcements and refreshments, not forgetting fitting provision of
the sacred wine for the imperial mouth. Accordingly, the Roman bands of
Immortals and others had resumed their march, and held some way on
their journey, it being the imperial pleasure that the Varangians,
lately the vanguard, should now form the rear of the whole army, so as
to bring off in safety the Syrian light troops, by whom the hilly pass
was still occupied, when we heard upon the other side of this defile,
which he had traversed with so much safety, the awful sound of the
_Lelies_, as the Arabs name their shout of onset, though in what
language it is expressed, it would be hard to say. Perchance some in
this audience may enlighten my ignorance."

"May I speak and live," said the Acoulouthos Achilles, proud of his
literary knowledge, "the words are, _Alla illa alla, Mohamed resoul
alla_.[Footnote: i. e. "God is god--Mahomet is the prophet of God."]
These, or something like them, contain the Arabs' profession of faith,
which they always call out when they join battle; I have heard them
many times."

"And so have I," said the Emperor; "and as thou didst, I warrant me, I
have sometimes wished myself anywhere else than within hearing."

All the circle were alive to hear the answer of Achilles Tatius. He was
too good a courtier, however, to make any imprudent reply. "It was my
duty," he replied, "to desire to be as near your Imperial Highness as
your faithful Follower ought, wherever you might wish yourself for the
time."

Agelastes and Zosimus exchanged looks, and the Princess Anna Comnena
proceeded in her recitation.

"The cause of these ominous sounds, which came in wild confusion up the
rocky pass, was soon explained to us by a dozen cavaliers, to whom the
task of bringing intelligence had been assigned.

"These informed us, that the barbarians, whose host had been dispersed
around the position in which they had encamped the preceding day, had
not been enabled to get their forces together until our light troops
were evacuating the post they had occupied for securing the retreat of
our army. They were then drawing off from the tops of the hills into
the pass itself, when, in despite of the rocky ground, they were
charged furiously by Jezdegerd, at the head of a large body of his
followers, which, after repeated exertions, he had at length brought to
operate on the rear of the Syrians. Notwithstanding that the pass was
unfavourable for cavalry, the personal exertions of the infidel chief
made his followers advance with a degree of resolution unknown to the
Syrians of the Roman army, who, finding themselves at a distance from
their companions, formed the injurious idea that they were left thereto
be sacrificed, and thought of flight in various directions, rather than
of a combined and resolute resistance. The state of affairs, therefore,
at the further end of the pass, was less favourable than we could wish,
and those whose curiosity desired to see something which might be
termed the rout of the rear of an army, beheld the Syrians pursued from
the hill tops, overwhelmed, and individually cut down and made
prisoners by the bands of caitiff Mussulmans.

"His Imperial Highness looked upon the scene of battle for a few
minutes, and, much commoved at what he saw, was somewhat hasty in his
directions to the Varangians to resume their arms, and precipitate
their march towards Laodicea; whereupon one of those northern soldiers
said boldly, though in opposition to the imperial command, 'If we
attempt to go hastily down this hill, our rear-guard will be confused,
not only by our own hurry, but by these runaway scoundrels of Syrians,
who in their headlong flight will not fail to mix themselves among our
ranks. Let two hundred Varangians, who will live and die for the honour
of England, abide in the very throat of this pass with me, while the
rest escort the Emperor to this Laodicea, or whatever it is called. We
may perish in our defence, but we shall die in our duty; and I have
little doubt but we shall furnish such a meal as will stay the stomach
of these yelping hounds from seeking any farther banquet this day.'

"My imperial father at once discovered the importance of this advice,
though it made him wellnigh weep to see with what unshrinking fidelity
these poor barbarians pressed to fill up the number of those who were
to undertake this desperate duty--with what kindness they took leave of
their comrades, and with what jovial shouts they followed their
sovereign with their eyes as he proceeded on his march down the hill,
leaving them behind to resist and perish. The Imperial eyes were filled
with tears; and I am not ashamed to confess, that amid the terror of
the moment, the Empress, and I myself, forgot our rank in paying a
similar tribute to these bold and self-devoted men.

"We left their leader carefully arraying his handful of comrades in
defence of the pass, where the middle path was occupied by their
centre, while their wings on either side were so disposed as to act
upon the flanks of the enemy, should he rashly press upon such as
appeared opposed to him in the road. We had not proceeded half way
towards the plain, when a dreadful shout arose, in which the yells of
the Arabs were mingled with the deep and more regular shouts which
these strangers usually repeat thrice, as well when bidding hail to
their commanders and princes, as when in the act of engaging in battle.
Many a look was turned back by their comrades, and many a form was seen
in the ranks which might have claimed the chisel of a sculptor, while
the soldier hesitated whether to follow the line of his duty, which
called him to march forward with his Emperor, or the impulse of
courage, which prompted him to rush back to join his companions.
Discipline, however, prevailed, and the main body marched on.

"An hour had elapsed, during which we heard, from time to time, the
noise of battle, when a mounted Varangian presented himself at the side
of the Emperor's litter. The horse was covered with foam, and had
obviously, from his trappings, the fineness of his limbs, and the
smallness of his joints, been the charger of some chief of the desert,
which had fallen by the chance of battle into the possession of the
northern warrior. The broad axe which the Varangian bore was also
stained with blood, and the paleness of death itself was upon his
countenance. These marks of recent battle were held sufficient to
excuse the irregularity of his salutation, while he exclaimed,--'Noble
Prince, the Arabs are defeated, and you may pursue your march at more
leisure.'

"'Where is Jezdegerd?' said the Emperor, who had many reasons for
dreading this celebrated chief.

"'Jezdegerd,' continued the Varangian, 'is where brave men are who fall
in their duty.'

"'And that is'--said the Emperor, impatient to know distinctly the fate
of so formidable an adversary--

"'Where I am now going,' answered the faithful soldier, who dropped
from his horse as he spoke, and expired at the feet of the
litter-bearers. The Emperor called to his attendants to see that the
body of this faithful retainer, to whom he destined an honourable
sepulchre, was not left to the jackal or vulture; and some of his
brethren, the Anglo-Saxons, among whom he was a man of no mean repute,
raised the body on their shoulders, and resumed their march with this
additional encumbrance, prepared to fight for their precious burden,
like the valiant Menelaus for the body of Patroclus."

The Princess Anna Comnena here naturally paused; for, having attained
what she probably considered as the rounding of a period, she was
willing to gather an idea of the feelings of her audience. Indeed, but
that she had been intent upon her own manuscript, the emotions of the
foreign soldier must have more early attracted her attention. In the
beginning of her recitation, he had retained the same attitude which he
had at first assumed, stiff and rigid as a sentinel upon duty, and
apparently remembering nothing save that he was performing that duty in
presence of the imperial court. As the narrative advanced, however, he
appeared to take more interest in what was read. The anxious fears
expressed by the various leaders in the midnight council, he listened
to with a smile of suppressed contempt, and he almost laughed at the
praises bestowed upon the leader of his own corps, Achilles Tatius. Nor
did, even the name of the Emperor, though listened to respectfully,
gain that applause for which his daughter fought so hard, and used so
much exaggeration.

Hitherto the Varangian's countenance indicated very slightly any
internal emotions; but they appeared to take a deeper hold on his mind
as she came to the description of the halt after the main army had
cleared the pass; the unexpected advance of the Arabs; the retreat of
the column which escorted the Emperor; and the account of the distant
engagement. He lost, on hearing the narration of these events, the
rigid and constrained look of a soldier, who listened to the history of
his Emperor with the same feelings with which he would have mounted
guard at his palace. His colour began to come and go; his eyes to fill
and to sparkle; his limbs to become more agitated than their owner
seemed to assent to; and his whole appearance was changed into that of
a listener, highly interested by the recitation which he hears, and
insensible, or forgetful, of whatever else is passing before him, as
well as of the quality of those who are present.

As the historian proceeded, Hereward became less able to conceal his
agitation; and at the moment the Princess looked round, his feelings
became so acute, that, forgetting where he was, he dropped his
ponderous axe upon the floor, and, clasping his hands together,
exclaimed,--"My unfortunate brother!"

All were startled by the clang of the falling weapon, and several
persons at once attempted to interfere, as called upon to explain a
circumstance so unusual. Achilles Tatius made some small progress in a
speech designed to apologize for the rough mode of venting his sorrows
to which Hereward had given way, by assuring the eminent persons
present, that the poor uncultivated barbarian was actually younger
brother to him who had commanded and fallen at the memorable defile.
The Princess said nothing, but was evidently struck, and affected, and
not ill-pleased, perhaps, at having given rise to feelings of interest
so flattering to her as an authoress. The others, each in their
character, uttered incoherent words of what was meant to be
consolation; for distress which flows from a natural cause, generally
attracts sympathy even from the most artificial characters. The voice
of Alexius silenced all these imperfect speakers: "Hah, my brave
soldier, Edward!" said the Emperor, "I must have been blind that I did
not sooner recognise thee, as I think there is a memorandum entered,
respecting five hundred pieces of gold due from us to Edward the
Varangian; we have it in our secret scroll of such liberalities for
which we stand indebted to our servitors, nor shall the payment be
longer deferred." "Not to me, if it may please you, my liege," said the
Anglo-Dane, hastily composing his countenance into its rough gravity of
lineament, "lest it should be to one who can claim no interest in your
imperial munificence. My name is Hereward; that of Edward is borne by
three of my companions, all of them as likely as I to have deserved
your Highness's reward for the faithful performance of their duty."

Many a sign was made by Tatius in order to guard his soldier against
the folly of declining the liberality of the Emperor. Agelastes spoke
more plainly: "Young man," he said, "rejoice in an honour so
unexpected, and answer henceforth to no other name save that of Edward,
by which it hath pleased the light of the world, as it poured a ray
upon thee, to distinguish thee from other barbarians. What is to thee
the font-stone, or the priest officiating thereat, shouldst thou have
derived from either any epithet different from that by which it hath
now pleased the Emperor to distinguish thee from the common mass of
humanity, and by which proud distinction thou hast now a right to be
known ever afterwards?"

"Hereward was the name of my father," said the soldier, who had now
altogether recovered his composure. "I cannot abandon it while I honour
his memory in death. Edward is the title of my comrade--I must not run
the risk of usurping his interest."

"Peace all!" interrupted the Emperor. "If we have made a mistake, we
are rich enough to right it; nor shall Hereward be the poorer, if an
Edward shall be found to merit this gratuity."

"Your Highness may trust that to your affectionate consort," answered
the Empress Irene.

"His most sacred Highness," said the Princess Anna Comnena, "is so
avariciously desirous to do whatever is good and gracious, that he
leaves no room even for his nearest connexions to display generosity or
munificence. Nevertheless, I, in my degree, will testify my gratitude
to this brave man; for where his exploits are mentioned in this
history, I will cause to be recorded,--'This feat was done by Hereward
the Anglo-Dane, whom it hath pleased his Imperial Majesty to call
Edward.' Keep this, good youth," she continued, bestowing at the same
time a ring of price, "in token that we will not forget our engagement."

Hereward accepted the token with a profound obeisance, and a
discomposure which his station rendered not unbecoming. It was obvious
to most persons present, that the gratitude of the beautiful Princess
was expressed in a manner more acceptable to the youthful
life-guardsman, than that of Alexius Comnenus. He took the ring with
great demonstration of thankfulness:--"Precious relic!" he said, as he
saluted this pledge of esteem by pressing it to his lips; "we may not
remain long together, but be assured," bending reverently to the
Princess, "that death alone shall part us."

"Proceed, our princely daughter," said the Empress Irene; "you have
done enough to show that valour is precious to her who can confer fame,
whether it be found in a Roman or a barbarian."

The Princess resumed her narrative with some slight appearance of
embarrassment.

"Our movement upon Laodicea was now resumed, and continued with good
hopes on the part of those engaged in the march. Yet instinctively we
could not help casting our eyes to the rear, which had been so long the
direction in which we feared attack. At length, to our surprise, a
thick cloud of dust was visible on the descent of the hill, half way
betwixt us and the place at which we had halted. Some of the troops who
composed our retreating body, particularly those in the rear, began to
exclaim 'The Arabs! the Arabs!' and their march assumed a more
precipitate character when they believed themselves pursed by the
enemy. But the Varangian guards affirmed with one voice, that the dust
was raised by the remains of their own comrades, who, left in the
defence of the pass, had marched off after having so valiantly
maintained the station intrusted to them. They fortified their opinion
by professional remarks that the cloud of dust was more concentrated
than if raised by the Arab horse, and they even pretended to assert,
from their knowledge of such cases, that the number of their comrades
had been much diminished in the action. Some Syrian horsemen,
despatched to reconnoitre the approaching body, brought intelligence
corresponding with the opinion of the Varangians in every particular.
The portion of the body-guard had beaten back the Arabs, and their
gallant leader had slain their chief Jezdegerd, in which service he was
mortally wounded, as this history hath already mentioned. The survivors
of the detachment, diminished by one half, were now on their march to
join the Emperor, as fast as the encumbrance of bearing their wounded
to a place of safety would permit.

"The Emperor Alexius, with one of those brilliant and benevolent ideas
which mark his paternal character towards his soldiers, ordered all the
litters, even that for his own most sacred use, to be instantly sent
back to relieve the bold Varangians of the task of bearing the wounded.
The shouts of the Varangians' gratitude may be more easily conceived
than described, when they beheld the Emperor himself descend from his
litter, like an ordinary cavalier, and assume his war-horse, at the
same time that the most sacred Empress, as well as the authoress of
this history, with other princesses born in the purple, mounted upon
mules in order to proceed upon the march, while their litters were
unhesitatingly assigned for the accommodation of the wounded men. This
was indeed a mark, as well of military sagacity as of humanity; for the
relief afforded to the bearers of the wounded, enabled the survivors of
those who had defended the defile at the fountain, to join us sooner
than would otherwise have been possible.

"It was an awful thing to see those men who had left us in the full
splendour which military equipment gives to youth and strength, again
appearing in diminished numbers--their armour shattered--their shields
full of arrows--their offensive weapons marked with blood, and they
themselves exhibiting all the signs of desperate and recent battle. Nor
was it less interesting to remark the meeting of the soldiers who had
been engaged, with the comrades whom they had rejoined. The Emperor, at
the suggestion of the trusty Acoulouthos, permitted them a few moments
to leave their ranks, and learn from each other the fate of the battle.

"As the two bands mingled, it seemed a meeting where grief and joy had
a contest together. The most rugged of these barbarians,--and I who saw
it can bear witness to the fact,--as he welcomed with a grasp of his
strong hand some comrade whom he had given up for lost, had his large
blue eyes filled with tears at hearing of the loss of some one whom he
had hoped might have survived. Other veterans reviewed the standards
which had been in the conflict, satisfied themselves that they had all
been brought back in honour and safety, and counted the fresh
arrow-shots with which they had been pierced, in addition to similar
marks of former battles. All were loud in the praises of the brave
young leader they had lost, nor were the acclamations less general in
laud of him who had succeeded to the command, who brought up the party
of his deceased brother--and whom," said the Princess, in a few words
which seemed apparently interpolated for the occasion, "I now assure of
the high honour and estimation in which he is held by the author of
this history--that is, I would say, by every member of the imperial
family--for his gallant services in such an important crisis."

Having hurried over her tribute to her friend the Varangian, in which
emotions mingled that are not willingly expressed before so many
hearers, Anna Comnena proceeded with composure in the part of her
history which was less personal.

"We had not much time to make more observations on what passed among
those brave soldiers; for a few minutes having been allowed to their
feelings, the trumpet sounded the advance towards Laodicea, and we soon
beheld the town, now about four miles from us, in fields which were
chiefly covered with trees. Apparently the garrison had already some
notice of our approach, for carts and wains were seen advancing from
the gates with refreshments, which the heat of the day, the length of
the march, and columns of dust, as well as the want of water, had
rendered of the last necessity to us. The soldiers joyfully mended
their pace in order to meet the sooner with the supplies of which they
stood so much in need. But as the cup doth not carry in all cases the
liquid treasure to the lips for which it was intended, however much it
may be longed for, what was our mortification to behold a cloud of
Arabs issue at full gallop from the wooded plain betwixt the Roman army
and the city, and throw themselves upon the waggons, slaying the
drivers, and making havoc and spoil of the contents! This, we
afterwards learned, was a body of the enemy, headed by Varanes, equal
in military fame, among those infidels, to Jezdegerd, his slain
brother. When this chieftain saw that it was probable that the
Varangians would succeed in their desperate defence of the pass, he put
himself at the head of a large body of the cavalry; and as these
infidels are mounted on horses unmatched either in speed or wind,
performed a long circuit, traversed the stony ridge of hills at a more
northerly defile, and placed himself in ambuscade in the wooded plain I
have mentioned, with the hope of making an unexpected assault upon the
Emperor and his army, at the very time when they might be supposed to
reckon upon an undisputed retreat. This surprise would certainly have
taken place, and it is not easy to say what might have been the
consequence, had not the unexpected appearance of the train of waggons
awakened the unbridled rapacity of the Arabs, in spite of their
commander's prudence, and attempts to restrain them. In this manner the
proposed ambuscade was discovered.

"But Varanes, willing still to gain some advantage from the rapidity of
his movements, assembled as many of his horsemen as could be collected
from the spoil, and pushed forward towards the Romans, who had stopped
short on their march at so unlooked for an apparition. There was an
uncertainty and wavering in our first ranks which made their hesitation
known even to so poor a judge of military demeanour as myself. On the
contrary, the Varangians joined in a unanimous cry of 'Bills'
[Footnote: Villehardouin says, "Les Anglois et Danois mult bien
rombattoint avec leurs _haches_."] (that is, in their language,
battle-axes,) 'to the front!' and the Emperor's most gracious will
acceding to their valorous desire, they pressed forward from the rear
to the head of the column. I can hardly say how this manoeuvre was
executed, but it was doubtless by the wise directions of my most serene
father, distinguished for his presence of mind upon such difficult
occasions. It was, no doubt, much facilitated by the good will of the
troops themselves; the Roman bands, called the Immortals, showing, as
it seemed to me, no less desire to fall into the rear, than did the
Varangians to occupy the places which the Immortals left vacant in
front. The manoeuvre was so happily executed, that before Varanes and
his Arabs had arrived at the van of our troops, they found it occupied
by the inflexible guard of northern soldiers. I might have seen with my
own eyes, and called upon them as sure evidences of that which chanced
upon the occasion. But, to confess the truth, my eyes were little used
to look upon such sights; for of Varanes's charge I only beheld, as it
were, a thick cloud of dust rapidly driven forward, through which were
seen the glittering points of lances, and the waving plumes of turban'd
cavaliers imperfectly visible. The tecbir was so loudly uttered, that I
was scarcely aware that kettle-drums and brazen cymbals were sounding
in concert with it. But this wild and outrageous storm was met as
effectually as if encountered by a rock.

"The Varangians, unshaken by the furious charge of the Arabs, received
horse and rider with a shower of blows from their massive battle-axes,
which the bravest of the enemy could not face, nor the strongest
endure. The guards strengthened their ranks also, by the hindmost
pressing so close upon those that went before, after the manner of the
ancient Macedonians, that the fine-limbed, though slight steeds of
those Idumeans could not make the least inroad upon the northern
phalanx. The bravest men, the most gallant horses, fell in the first
rank. The weighty, though short, horse javelins, flung from the rear
ranks of the brave Varangians, with good aim and sturdy arm, completed
the confusion of the assailants, who turned their back in affright, and
fled from the field in total confusion.

"The enemy thus repulsed, we proceeded on our march, and only halted
when we recovered our half-plundered waggons. Here, also, some
invidious remarks were made by certain officers of the interior of the
household, who had been on duty over the stores, and having fled from
their posts on the assault of the infidels, had only returned upon
their being repulsed. These men, quick in malice, though slow in
perilous service, reported that, on this occasion, the Varangians so
far forgot their duty as to consume a part of the sacred wine reserved
for the imperial lips alone. It would be criminal to deny that this was
a great and culpable oversight; nevertheless, our imperial hero passed
it over as a pardonable offence; remarking, in a jesting manner, that
since he had drunk the _ail_, as they termed it, of his trusty guard,
the Varangians had acquired a right to quench the thirst, and to
relieve the fatigue, which they had undergone that day in his defence,
though they used for these purposes the sacred contents of the imperial
cellar.

"In the meantime, the cavalry of the army were despatched in pursuit of
the fugitive Arabs; and having succeeded in driving them behind the
chain of hills which had so recently divided them from the Romans, the
imperial arms might justly be considered as having obtained a complete
and glorious victory.

"We are now to mention the rejoicings of the citizens of Laodicea, who,
having witnessed from their ramparts, with alternate fear and hope, the
fluctuations of the battle, now descended to congratulate the imperial
conqueror."

Here the fair narrator was interrupted. The principal entrance of the
apartment flew open, noiselessly indeed, but with both folding leaves
at once, not as if to accommodate the entrance of an ordinary courtier,
studying to create as little disturbance as possible, but as if there
was entering a person, who ranked so high as to make it indifferent how
much attention was drawn to his motions. It could only be one born in
the purple, or nearly allied to it, to whom such freedom was lawful;
and most of the guests, knowing who were likely to appear in that
Temple of the Muses, anticipated, from the degree of bustle, the
arrival of Nicephorus Briennius, the son-in-law of Alexius Comnenus,
the husband to the fair historian, and in the rank of Caesar, which,
however, did not at that period imply, as in early ages, the dignity of
second person in the empire. The policy of Alexius had interposed more
than one person of condition between the Caesar and his original rights
and rank, which had once been second to those only of the Emperor
himself.




CHAPTER THE FIFTH.

    The storm increases--'tis no sunny shower,
    Foster'd in the moist breast of March or April,
    Or such as parched Summer cools his lip with:
    Heaven's windows are flung wide; the inmost deeps
    Call in hoarse greeting one upon another;
    On comes the flood in all its foaming horrors,
    And where's the dike shall stop it!
                             THE DELUGE, _a Poem_.


The distinguished individual who entered was a noble Grecian, of
stately presence, whose habit was adorned with every mark of dignity,
saving those which Alexius had declared sacred to the Emperor's own
person and that of the Sebastocrator, whom he had established as next
in rank to the head of the empire. Nicephorus Briennius, who was in the
bloom of youth, retained all the marks of that manly beauty which had
made the match acceptable to Anna Comnena; while political
considerations, and the desire of attaching a powerful house as
friendly adherents of the throne, recommended the union to the Emperor.

We have already hinted that the royal bride had, though in no great
degree, the very doubtful advantage of years. Of her literary talents
we have seen tokens. Yet it was not believed by those who best knew,
that, with the aid of those claims to respect, Anna Comnena was
successful in possessing the unlimited attachment of her handsome
husband. To treat her with apparent neglect, her connexion with the
crown rendered impossible; while, on the other hand, the power of
Nicephorus's family was too great to permit his being dictated to even
by the Emperor himself. He was possessed of talents, as it was
believed, calculated both for war and peace. His advice was, therefore,
listened to, and his assistance required, so that he claimed complete
liberty with respect to his own time, which he sometimes used with less
regular attendance upon the Temple of the Muses, than the goddess of
the place thought herself entitled to, or than the Empress Irene was
disposed to exact on the part of her daughter. The good-humoured
Alexius observed a sort of neutrality in this matter, and kept it as
much as possible from becoming visible to the public, conscious that it
required the whole united strength of his family to maintain his place
in so agitated an empire.

He pressed his son-in-law's hand, as Nicephorus, passing his
father-in-law's seat, bent his knee in token of homage. The constrained
manner of the Empress indicated a more cold reception of her
son-in-law, while the fair muse herself scarcely deigned to signify her
attention to his arrival, when her handsome mate assumed the vacant
seat by her side, which we have already made mention of.

There was an awkward pause, during which the imperial son-in-law,
coldly received when he expected to be welcomed, attempted to enter
into some light conversation with the fair slave Astarte, who knelt
behind her mistress. This was interrupted by the Princess commanding
her attendant to enclose the manuscript within its appropriate casket,
and convey it with her own hands to the cabinet of Apollo, the usual
scene of the Princess's studies, as the Temple of the Muses was that
commonly dedicated to her recitations.

The Emperor himself was the first to break an unpleasant silence. "Fair
son-in-law," he said, "though it now wears something late in the night,
you will do yourself wrong if you permit our Anna to send away that
volume, with which this company have been so delectably entertained
that they may well say, that the desert hath produced roses, and the
barren rocks have poured forth milk and honey, so agreeable is the
narrative of a toilsome and dangerous campaign, in the language of our
daughter."

"The Caesar," said the Empress, "seems to have little taste for such
dainties as this family can produce. He hath of late repeatedly
absented himself from this Temple of the Muses, and found doubtless
more agreeable conversation and amusement elsewhere."

"I trust, madam," said Nicephorus, "that my taste may vindicate me from
the charge implied. But it is natural that our sacred father should be
most delighted with the milk and honey which is produced for his own
special use."

The Princess spoke in the tone of a handsome woman offended by her
lover, and feeling the offence, yet not indisposed to a reconciliation.

"If," she said, "the deeds of Nicephorus Briennius are less frequently
celebrated in that poor roll of parchment than those of my illustrious
father, he must do me the justice to remember that such was his own
special request; either proceeding from that modesty which is justly
ascribed to him as serving to soften and adorn his other attributes, or
because he with justice distrusts his wife's power to compose their
eulogium."

"We will then summon back Astarte," said the Empress, "who cannot yet
have carried her offering to the cabinet of Apollo."

"With your imperial pleasure," said Nicephorus, "it might incense the
Pythian god were a deposit to be recalled of which he alone can fitly
estimate the value. I came hither to speak with the Emperor upon
pressing affairs of state, and not to hold a literary conversation with
a company which I must needs say is something of a miscellaneous
description, since I behold an ordinary life-guardsman in the imperial
circle."

"By the rood, son-in-law," said Alexius, "you do this gallant man
wrong. He is the brother of that brave Anglo-Dane who secured the
victory at Laodicea by his valiant conduct and death; he himself is
that Edmund--or Edward---or Hereward---to whom we are ever bound for
securing the success of that victorious day. He was called into our
presence, son-in-law, since it imports that you should know so much, to
refresh the memory of any Follower, Achilles Tatius, as well as mine
own, concerning some transactions of the day of which we had become in
some degree oblivious."

"Truly, imperial sir," answered Briennius, "I grieve that, by having
intruded on some such important researches, I may have, in some degree,
intercepted a portion of that light which is to illuminate future ages.
Methinks that in a battle-field, fought under your imperial guidance,
and that of your great captains, your evidence might well supersede the
testimony of such a man as this.--Let me know," he added, turning
haughtily to the Varangian, "what particular thou canst add, that is
unnoticed in the Princess's narrative?"

The Varangian replied instantly, "Only that when we made a halt at the
fountain, the music that was there made by the ladies of the Emperor's
household, and particularly by those two whom I now behold, was the
most exquisite that ever reached my ears."

"Hah! darest thou to speak so audacious an opinion?" exclaimed
Nicephorus; "is it for such as thou to suppose for a moment that the
music which the wife and daughter of the Emperor might condescend to
make, was intended to afford either matter of pleasure or of criticism
to every plebeian barbarian who might hear them? Begone from this
place! nor dare, on any pretext, again to appear before mine
eyes--under allowance always of our imperial father's pleasure."

The Varangian bent his looks upon Achilles Tatius, as the person from
whom he was to take his orders to stay or withdraw. But the Emperor
himself took up the subject with considerable dignity.

"Son," he said, "we cannot permit this. On account of some love
quarrel, as it would seem, betwixt you and our daughter, you allow
yourself strangely to forget our imperial rank, and to order from our
presence those whom we have pleased to call to attend us. This is
neither right nor seemly, nor is it our pleasure that this same
Hereward--or Edward--or whatever be his name--either leave us at this
present moment, or do at any time hereafter regulate himself by any
commands save our own, or those of our Follower, Achilles Tatius. And
now, allowing this foolish affair, which I think was blown among us by
the wind, to pass as it came, without farther notice, we crave to know
the grave matters of state which brought you to our presence at so late
an hour.--You look again at this Varangian.--Withhold not your words, I
pray you, on account of his presence; for he stands as high in our
trust, and we are convinced with as good reason, as any counsellor who
has been sworn our domestic servant."

"To hear is to obey," returned the Emperor's son-in-law, who saw that
Alexius was somewhat moved, and knew that in such cases it was neither
safe nor expedient to drive him to extremity. "What I have to say,"
continued he, "must so soon be public news, that it little matters who
hears it; and yet the West, so full of strange changes, never sent to
the Eastern half of the globe tidings so alarming as those I now come
to tell your Imperial Highness. Europe, to borrow an expression from
this lady, who honours me by calling me husband, seems loosened from
its foundations and about to precipitate itself upon Asia"----

"So I did express myself," said the Princess Anna Comnena, "and, as I
trust, not altogether unforcibly, when we first heard that the wild
impulse of those restless barbarians of Europe had driven a tempest as
of a thousand nations upon our western frontier, with the extravagant
purpose, as they pretended, of possessing themselves of Syria, and the
holy places there marked as the sepulchres of prophets, the martyrdom
of saints, and the great events detailed in the blessed gospel. But
that storm, by all accounts, hath burst and passed away, and we well
hoped that the danger had gone with it. Devoutly shall we sorrow to
find it otherwise."

"And otherwise we must expect to find it," said her husband. "It is
very true, as reported to us, that a huge body of men, of low rank and
little understanding, assumed arms at the instigation of a mad hermit,
and took the road from Germany to Hungary, expecting miracles to be
wrought in their favour, as when Israel was guided through the
wilderness by a pillar of flame and a cloud. But no showers of manna or
of quails relieved their necessities, or proclaimed them the chosen
people of God. No waters gushed from the rock for their refreshment.
They were enraged at their sufferings, and endeavoured to obtain
supplies by pillaging the country. The Hungarians, and other nations on
our western frontiers, Christians, like themselves, did not hesitate to
fall upon this disorderly rabble; and immense piles of bones, in wild
passes and unfrequented deserts, attest the calamitous defeats which
extirpated these unholy pilgrims."

"All this," said the Emperor, "we knew before;--but what new evil now
threatens, since we have already escaped so important a one?"

"Knew before?" said the Prince Nicephorus. "We knew nothing of our real
danger before, save that a wild herd of animals, as brutal and as
furious as wild bulls, threatened to bend their way to a pasture for
which they had formed a fancy, and deluged the Grecian empire, and its
vicinity, in their passage, expecting that Palestine, with its streams
of milk and honey, once more awaited them, as God's predestined people.
But so wild and disorderly an invasion had no terrors for a civilized
nation like the Romans. The brute herd was terrified by our Greek fire;
it was snared and shot down by the wild nations who, while they pretend
to independence, cover our frontier as with a protecting fortification.
The vile multitude has been consumed even by the very quality of the
provisions thrown in their way,--those wise means of resistance which
were at once suggested by the paternal care of the Emperor, and by his
unfailing policy. Thus wisdom has played its part, and the bark over
which the tempest had poured its thunder, has escaped, notwithstanding
all its violence. But the second storm, by which the former is so
closely followed, is of a new descent of these Western nations, more
formidable than any which we or our fathers have yet seen. This
consists not of the ignorant or of the fanatical--not of the base, the
needy, and the improvident. Now,--all that wide Europe possesses of
what is wise and worthy, brave and noble, are united by the most
religious vows, in the same purpose."

"And what is that purpose? Speak plainly," said Alexius. "The
destruction of our whole Roman empire, and the blotting out the very
name of its chief from among the princes of the earth, among which it
has long been predominant, can alone be an adequate motive for a
confederacy such as thy speech infers."

"No such design is avowed," said Nicephorus; "and so many princes, wise
men, and statesmen of eminence, aim, it is pretended, at nothing else
than the same extravagant purpose announced by the brute multitude who
first appeared in these regions. Here, most gracious Emperor, is a
scroll, in which you will find marked down a list of the various armies
which, by different routes, are approaching the vicinity of the empire.
Behold, Hugh of Vermandois, called from his dignity Hugh the Great, has
set sail from the shores of Italy. Twenty knights have already
announced their coming, sheathed in armour of steel, inlaid with gold,
bearing this proud greeting:--'Let the Emperor of Greece, and his
lieutenants, understand that Hugo, Earl of Vermandois, is approaching
his territories. He is brother to the king of kings--The King of
France,[Footnote: Ducange pours out a whole ocean of authorities to
show that the King of France was in those days styled _Rex_, by way of
eminence. See his notes on the Alexiad. Anna Comnena in her history
makes Hugh, of Vermandois assume to himself the titles which could
only, in the most enthusiastic Frenchman's opinion, have been claimed
by his older brother, the reigning monarch.] namely--and is attended by
the flower of the French nobility. He bears the blessed banner of St.
Peter, intrusted to his victorious care by the holy successor of the
apostle, and warns thee of all this, that thou mayst provide a
reception suitable to his rank.'"

"Here are sounding words," said the Emperor; "but the wind which
whistles loudest is not always most dangerous to the vessel. We know
something of this nation of France, and have heard more. They are as
petulant at least as they are valiant; we will flatter their vanity
till we get time and opportunity for more effectual defence. Tush! if
words can pay debt, there is no fear of our exchequer becoming
insolvent.--What follows here, Nicephorus? A list, I suppose, of the
followers of this great count?"

"My liege, no!" answered Nicephorus Briennius; "so many independent
chiefs, as your Imperial Highness sees in that memorial, so many
independent European armies are advancing by different routes towards
the East, and announce the conquest of Palestine from the infidels as
their common object."

"A dreadful enumeration," said the Emperor, as he perused the list;
"yet so far happy, that its very length assures us of the impossibility
that so many princes can be seriously and consistently united in so
wild a project. Thus already my eyes catch the well-known name of an
old friend, our enemy--for such are the alternate chances of peace and
war--Bohemond of Antioch. Is not he the son of the celebrated Robert of
Apulia, so renowned among his countrymen, who raised himself to the
rank of grand duke from a simple cavalier, and became sovereign of
those of his warlike nation, both in Sicily and Italy? Did not the
standards of the German Emperor, of the Roman Pontiff, nay, our own
imperial banners, give way before him; until, equally a wily statesman
and a brave warrior, he became the terror of Europe, from being a
knight whose Norman castle would have been easily garrisoned by six
cross-bows, and as many lances? It is a dreadful family, a race of
craft as well as power. But Bohemond, the son of old Robert, will
follow his father's politics. He may talk of Palestine and of the
interests of Christendom, but if I can make his interests the same with
mine, he is not likely to be guided by any other object. So then, with
the knowledge I already possess of his wishes and projects, it may
chance that Heaven sends us an ally in the guise of an enemy.--Whom
have we next? Godfrey [Footnote: Godfrey of Bouillon, Duke of Lower
Lorraine--the great Captain of the first Crusade, afterwards King of
Jerusalem. See Gibbon,--or Mills, _passim_.] Duke of Bouillon--leading,
I see, a most formidable band from the banks of a huge river called the
Rhine. What is this person's character?"

"As we hear," replied Nicephorus, "this Godfrey is one of the wisest,
noblest, and bravest of the leaders who have thus strangely put
themselves in motion; and among a list of independent princes, as many
in number as those who assembled for the siege of Troy, and followed,
most of them, by subjects ten times more numerous, this Godfrey may be
regarded as the Agamemnon. The princes and counts esteem him, because
he is the foremost in the ranks of those whom they fantastically call
Knights, and also on account of the good faith and generosity which he
practises in all his transactions. The clergy give him credit for the
highest zeal for the doctrines of religion, and a corresponding respect
for the Church and its dignitaries. Justice, liberality, and frankness,
have equally attached to this Godfrey the lower class of the people.
His general attention to moral obligations is a pledge to them that his
religion is real; and, gifted with so much that is excellent, he is
already, although inferior in rank, birth, and power to many chiefs of
the crusade, justly regarded as one of its principal leaders."

"Pity," said the Emperor, "that a character such as you describe this
Prince to be, should be under the dominion of a fanaticism scarce
worthy of Peter the Hermit, or the clownish multitude which he led, or
of the very ass which he rode upon! which I am apt to think the wisest
of the first multitude whom we beheld, seeing that it ran away towards
Europe as soon as water and barley became scarce."

"Might I be permitted here to speak, and yet live," said Agelastes, "I
would remark that the Patriarch himself made a similar retreat so soon
as blows became plenty and food scarce."

"Thou hast hit it, Agelastes," said the Emperor; "but the question now
is, whether an honorable and important principality could not be formed
out of part of the provinces of the Lesser Asia, now laid waste by the
Turks. Such a principality, methinks, with its various advantages of
soil, climate, industrious inhabitants, and a healthy atmosphere, were
well worth the morasses of Bouillon. It might be held as a dependence
upon the sacred Roman empire, and garrisoned, as it were, by Godfrey
and his victorious Franks, would be a bulwark on that point to our just
and sacred person. Ha! most holy patriarch, would not such a prospect
shake the most devout Crusader's attachment to the burning sands of
Palestine?"

"Especially," answered the Patriarch, "if the prince for whom such a
rich _theme_ [Footnote: These provinces were called _Themes_.] was
changed into a feudal appanage, should be previously converted to the
only true faith, as your Imperial Highness undoubtedly means."

"Certainly--most unquestionably," answered the Emperor, with a due
affectation of gravity, notwithstanding he was internally conscious how
often he had been compelled, by state necessities, to admit, not only
Latin Christians, but Manicheans, and other heretics, nay, Mahomedan
barbarians, into the number of his subjects, and that without
experiencing opposition from the scruples of the Patriarch. "Here I
find," continued the Emperor, "such a numerous list of princes and
principalities in the act of approaching our boundaries, as might well
rival the armies of old, who were said to have drunk up rivers,
exhausted realms, and trode down forests, in their wasteful advance."
As he pronounced these words, a shade of paleness came over the
Imperial brow, similar to that which had already clothed in sadness
most of his counsellors.

"This war of nations," said Nicephorus, "has also circumstances
distinguishing it from every other, save that which his Imperial
Highness hath waged in former times against those whom we are
accustomed to call Franks. We must go forth against a people to whom
the strife of combat is as the breath of their nostrils; who, rather
than not be engaged in war, will do battle with their nearest
neighbours, and challenge each other to mortal fight, as much in sport
as we would defy a comrade to a chariot-race. They are covered with an
impenetrable armour of steel, defending them from blows of the lance
and sword, and which the uncommon strength of their horses renders them
able to support, though one of ours could as well bear Mount Olympus
upon his loins. Their foot-ranks carry a missile weapon unknown to us,
termed an arblast, or cross-bow. It is not drawn with the right hand,
like the bow of other nations, but by placing the feet upon the weapon
itself, and pulling with the whole force of the body; and it despatches
arrows called bolts, of hard wood pointed with iron, which the strength
of the bow can send through the strongest breastplates, and even
through stone walls, where not of uncommon thickness."

"Enough," said the Emperor; "we have seen with our own eyes the lances
of Frankish knights, and the cross-bows of their infantry. If Heaven
has allotted them a degree of bravery, which to other nations seems
wellnigh preternatural, the Divine will has given to the Greek councils
that wisdom which it hath refused to barbarians; the art of achieving
conquest by wisdom rather than brute force--obtaining by our skill in
treaty advantages which victory itself could not have procured. If we
have not the use of that dreadful weapon, which our son-in-law terms
the cross-bow, Heaven, in its favour, has concealed from these western
barbarians the composition and use of the Greek fire--well so called,
since by Grecian hands alone it is prepared, and by such only can its
lightnings be darted upon the astonished foe." The Emperor paused, and
looked around him; and although the faces of his counsellors still
looked blank, he boldly proceeded:--"But to return yet again to this
black scroll, containing the names of those nations who approach our
frontier, here occur more than one with which, methinks, old memory
should make us familiar, though our recollections are distant and
confused. It becomes us to know who these men are, that we may avail
ourselves of those feuds and quarrels among them, which, being blown
into life, may happily divert them from the prosecution of this
extraordinary attempt in which they are now united. Here is, for
example, one Robert, styled Duke of Normandy, who commands a goodly
band of counts, with which title we are but too well acquainted; of
_earls_, a word totally strange to us, but apparently some barbaric
title of honour; and of knights whose names are compounded, as we
think, chiefly of the French language, but also of another jargon,
which we are not ourselves competent to understand. To you, most
reverend and most learned Patriarch, we may fittest apply for
information on this subject."

"The duties of my station," replied the patriarch Zosimus, "have
withheld my riper years from studying the history of distant realms;
but the wise Agelastes, who hath read as many volumes as would fill the
shelves of the famous Alexandrian library, can no doubt satisfy your
Imperial Majesty's enquiries."

Agelastes erected himself on those enduring legs which had procured him
the surname of Elephant, and began a reply to the enquiries of the
Emperor, rather remarkable for readiness than accuracy. "I have read,"
said he, "in that brilliant mirror which reflects the time of our
fathers, the volumes of the learned Procopius, that the people
separately called Normans and Angles are in truth the same race, and
that Normandy, sometimes so called, is in fact a part of a district of
Gaul. Beyond, and nearly opposite to it, but separated by an arm of the
sea, lies a ghastly region, on which clouds and tempests for ever rest,
and which is well known to its continental neighbours as the abode to
which departed spirits are sent after this life. On one side of the
strait dwell a few fishermen, men possessed of a strange charter, and
enjoying singular privileges, in consideration of their being the
living ferrymen who, performing the office of the heathen Charon, carry
the spirits of the departed to the island which is their residence
after death. At the dead of night, these fishermen are, in rotation,
summoned to perform the duty by which they seem to hold the permission
to reside on this strange coast. A knock is heard at the door of his
cottage who holds the turn of this singular service, sounded by no
mortal hand. A whispering, as of a decaying breeze, summons the
ferryman to his duty. He hastens to his bark on the sea-shore, and has
no sooner launched it than he perceives its hull sink sensibly in the
water, so as to express the weight of the dead with whom it is filled.
No form is seen, and though voices are heard, yet the accents are
undistinguishable, as of one who speaks in his sleep. Thus he traverses
the strait between the continent and the island, impressed with the
mysterious awe which affects the living when they are conscious of the
presence of the dead. They arrive upon the opposite coast, where the
cliffs of white chalk form a strange contrast with the eternal darkness
of the atmosphere. They stop at a landing-place appointed, but
disembark not, for the land is never trodden by earthly feet. Here the
passage-boat is gradually lightened of its unearthly inmates, who
wander forth in the way appointed to them, while the mariners slowly
return to their own side of the strait, having performed for the time
this singular service, by which they hold their fishing-huts and their
possessions on that strange coast." Here he ceased, and the Emperor
replied,--

"If this legend be actually told us by Procopius, most learned
Agelastes, it shows that that celebrated historian came more near the
heathen than the Christian belief respecting the future state. In
truth, this is little more than the old fable of the infernal Styx.
Procopius, we believe, lived before the decay of heathenism, and, as we
would gladly disbelieve much which he hath told us respecting our
ancestor and predecessor Justinian, so we will not pay him much credit
in future in point of geographical knowledge.--Meanwhile, what ails
thee, Achilles Tatius, and why dost thou whisper with that soldier?"

"My head," answered Achilles Tatius, "is at your imperial command,
prompt to pay for the unbecoming trespass of my tongue. I did but ask
of this Hereward here what he knew of this matter; for I have heard my
Varangians repeatedly call themselves Anglo-Danes, Normans, Britons, or
some other barbaric epithet, and I am sure that one or other, or it may
be all, of these barbarous sounds, at different times serve to
designate the birth-place of these exiles, too happy in being banished
from the darkness of barbarism, to the luminous vicinity of your
imperial presence."

"Speak, then, Varangian, in the name of Heaven," said the Emperor, "and
let us know whether we are to look for friends or enemies in those men
of Normandy who are now approaching our frontier. Speak with courage,
man; and if thou apprehendest danger, remember thou servest a prince
well qualified to protect thee."

"Since I am at liberty to speak," answered the life-guardian, "although
my knowledge of the Greek language, which you term the Roman, is but
slight, I trust it is enough to demand of his Imperial Highness, in
place of all pay, donative, or gift whatsoever, since he has been
pleased to talk of designing such for me, that he would place me in the
first line of battle which shall be formed against these same Normans,
and their Duke Robert; and if he pleases to allow me the aid of such
Varangians as, for love of me, or hatred of their ancient tyrants, may
be disposed to join their arms to mine, I have little doubt so to
settle our long accounts with these men, that the Grecian eagles and
wolves shall do them the last office, by tearing the flesh from their
bones."

"What dreadful feud is this, my soldier," said the Emperor, "that after
so many years still drives thee to such extremities when the very name
of Normandy is mentioned?"

"Your Imperial Highness shall be judge!" said the Varangian. "My
fathers, and those of most, though not all of the corps to whom I
belong, are descended from a valiant race who dwelt in the North of
Germany, called Anglo-Saxons. Nobody, save a priest possessed of the
art of consulting ancient chronicles, can even guess how long it is
since they came to the island of Britain, then distracted with civil
war. They came, however, on the petition of the natives of the island,
for the aid of the Angles was requested by the southern inhabitants.
Provinces were granted in recompense of the aid thus liberally
afforded, and the greater proportion of the island became, by degrees,
the property of the Anglo-Saxons, who occupied it at first as several
principalities, and latterly as one kingdom, speaking the language, and
observing the laws, of most of those who now form your imperial
body-guard of Varangians, or exiles. In process of time, the Northmen
became known to the people of the more southern climates. They were so
called from their coming from the distant regions of the Baltic Sea--an
immense ocean, sometimes frozen with ice as hard as the cliffs of Mount
Caucasus. They came seeking milder regions than nature had assigned
them at home; and the climate of France being delightful, and its
people slow in battle, they extorted from them the grant of a large
province which was, from the name of the new settlers, called Normandy,
though I have heard my father say that was not its proper appellation.
They settled there under a Duke, who acknowledged the superior
authority of the King of France, that is to say, obeying him when it
suited his convenience so to do.

"Now, it chanced many years since, while these two nations of Normans
and Anglo-Saxons were quietly residing upon different sides of the
salt-water channel which divides France from England, that William,
Duke of Normandy, suddenly levied a large army, came over to Kent,
which is on the opposite side of the channel, and there defeated in a
great battle, Harold, who was at that time King of the Anglo-Saxons. It
is but grief to tell what followed. Battles have been fought in old
time, that have had dreadful results, which years, nevertheless, could
wash away; but at Hastings--O woe's me!--the banner of my country fell,
never again to be raised up. Oppression has driven her wheel over us.
All that was valiant amongst us have left the land; and of
Englishmen--for such is our proper designation--no one remains in
England save as the thrall of the invaders. Many men of Danish descent,
who had found their way on different occasions to England, were blended
in the common calamity. All was laid desolate by the command of the
victors. My father's home lies now an undistinguished ruin, amid an
extensive forest, composed out of what were formerly fair fields and
domestic pastures, where a manly race derived nourishment by
cultivating a friendly soil. The fire has destroyed the church where
sleep the fathers of my race; and I, the last of their line, am a
wanderer in other climates--a fighter of the battles of others--the
servant of a foreign, though a kind master; in a word, one of the
banished--a Varangian."

"Happier in that station" said Achilles Tatius, "than in all the
barbaric simplicity which your forefathers prized so highly, since you
are now under the cheering influence of that smile which is the life of
the world."

"It avails not talking of this," said the Varangian, with a cold
gesture.

"These Normans" said the Emperor, "are then the people by whom the
celebrated island of Britain is now conquered and governed?"

"It is but too true" answered the Varangian.

"They are, then, a brave and warlike people?"--said Alexius.

"It would be base and false to say otherwise of an enemy" said
Hereward. "Wrong have they done me, and a wrong never to be atoned; but
to speak falsehood of them were but a woman's vengeance. Mortal enemies
as they are to me, and mingling with all my recollections as that which
is hateful and odious, yet were the troops of Europe mustered, as it
seems they are likely to be, no nation or tribe dared in gallantry
claim the advance of the haughty Norman."

"And this Duke Robert, who is he?"

"That," answered the Varangian, "I cannot so well explain. He is the
son--the eldest son, as men say, of the tyrant William, who subdued
England when I hardly existed, or was a child in the cradle. That
William, the victor of Hastings, is now dead, we are assured by
concurring testimony; but while it seems his eldest son Duke Robert has
become his heir to the Duchy of Normandy, some other of his children
have been so fortunate as to acquire the throne of England,--unless,
indeed, like the petty farm of some obscure yeoman, the fair kingdom
has been divided among the tyrant's issue."

"Concerning this," said the Emperor, "we have heard something, which we
shall try to reconcile with the soldier's narrative at leisure, holding
the words of this honest Varangian as positive proof, in whatsoever he
avers from his own knowledge.--And now, my grave and worthy
counsellors, we must close this evening's service in the Temple of the
Muses, this distressing news, brought us by our dearest son-in-law the
Caesar, having induced us to prolong our worship of these learned
goddesses, deeper into the night than is consistent with the health of
our beloved wife and daughter; while to ourselves, this intelligence
brings subject for grave deliberation."

The courtiers exhausted their ingenuity in forming the most ingenious
prayers, that all evil consequences should be averted which could
attend this excessive vigilance.

Nicephorus and his fair bride spoke together as a pair equally desirous
to close an accidental breach between them. "Some things thou hast
said, my Caesar," observed the lady, "in detailing this dreadful
intelligence, as elegantly turned as if the nine goddesses, to whom
this temple is dedicated, had lent each her aid to the sense and
expression."

"I need none of their assistance," answered Nicephorus, "since I
possess a muse of my own, in whose genius are included all those
attributes which the heathens vainly ascribed to the nine deities of
Parnassus!"

"It is well," said the fair historian, retiring by the assistance of
her husband's arm; "but if you will load your wife with praises far
beyond her merits, you must lend her your arm to support her under the
weighty burden you have been pleased to impose." The council parted
when the imperial persons had retired, and most of them sought to
indemnify themselves in more free though less dignified circles, for
the constraint which they had practised in the Temple of the Muses.




CHAPTER THE SIXTH.

     Vain man! thou mayst, esteem thy love as fair
     As fond hyperboles suffice to raise.
     She may be all that's matchless in her person,
     And all-divine in soul to match her body;
     But take this from me--thou shalt never call her
     Superior to her sex, while _one_ survives,
     And I am her true votary.
                                   OLD PLAY.


Achilles Tatius, with his faithful Varangian close by his shoulder,
melted from the dispersing assembly silently and almost invisibly, as
snow is dissolved from its Alpine abodes as the days become more
genial. No lordly step, nor clash of armour, betokened the retreat of
the military persons. The very idea of the necessity of guards was not
ostentatiously brought forward, because, so near the presence of the
Emperor, the emanation supposed to flit around that divinity of earthly
sovereigns, had credit for rendering it impassive and unassailable.
Thus the oldest and most skilful courtiers, among whom our friend
Agelastes was not to be forgotten, were of opinion, that, although the
Emperor employed the ministry of the Varangians and other guards, it
was rather for form's sake, than from any danger of the commission of a
crime of a kind so heinous, that it was the fashion to account it
almost impossible. And this doctrine, of the rare occurrence of such a
crime, was repeated from month to month in those very chambers, where
it had oftener than once been perpetrated, and sometimes by the very
persons who monthly laid schemes for carrying some dark conspiracy
against the reigning Emperor into positive execution.

At length the captain of the life-guardsmen, and his faithful
attendant, found themselves on the outside of the Blacquernal Palace.
The passage which Achilles found for their exit, was closed by a
postern which a single Varangian shut behind, them, drawing, at the
same time, bolt and bar with an ill-omened and jarring sound. Looking
back at the mass of turrets, battlements, and spires, out of which they
had at length emerged, Hereward could not but feel his heart lighten to
find "himself once more under the deep blue of a Grecian heaven, where
the planets were burning with unusual lustre. He sighed and rubbed his
hands with pleasure, like a man newly restored to liberty. He even
spoke to his leader, contrary to his custom unless
addressed:--"Methinks the air of yonder halls, valorous Captain,
carries with it a perfume, which, though it may be well termed sweet,
is so suffocating, as to be more suitable to sepulchrous chambers, than
to the dwellings of men. Happy I am that I am free, as I trust, from
its influences."

"Be happy, then," said Achilles Tatius, "since thy vile, cloddish
spirit feels suffocation rather than refreshment in gales, which,
instead of causing death, might recall the dead themselves to life. Yet
this I will say for thee, Hereward, that, born a barbarian, within the
narrow circle of a savage's desires and pleasures, and having no idea
of life, save what thou derivest from such vile and base connexions,
thou art, nevertheless, designed by nature for better things, and hast
this day sustained a trial, in which, I fear me, not even one of mine
own noble corps, frozen as they are into lumps of unfashioned
barbarity, could have equalled thy bearing. And speak now in true
faith, hast not thou been rewarded?"

"That will I never deny," said the Varangian. "The pleasure of knowing,
twenty-four hours perhaps before my comrades, that the Normans are
coming hither to afford us a full revenge of the bloody day of
Hastings, is a lordly recompense, for the task of spending some hours
in hearing the lengthened chat of a lady, who has written about she
knows not what, and the flattering commentaries of the bystanders, who
pretended to give her an account of what they did not themselves stop
to witness."

"Hereward, my good youth," said Achilles Tatius, "thou ravest, and I
think I should do well to place thee under the custody of some person
of skill. Too much hardihood, my valiant soldier, is in soberness
allied to over-daring. It was only natural that thou shouldst feel a
becoming pride in thy late position; yet, let it but taint thee with
vanity, and the effect will be little short of madness. Why, thou hast
looked boldly in the face of a Princess born in the purple, before whom
my own eyes, though well used to such spectacles, are never raised
beyond the foldings of her veil."

"So be it in the name of Heaven!" replied Hereward. "Nevertheless,
handsome faces were made to look upon, and the eyes of young men to see
withal."

"If such be their final end," said Achilles, "never did thine, I will
freely suppose, find a richer apology for the somewhat overbold license
which thou tookest in thy gaze upon the Princess this evening."

"Good leader, or Follower, whichever is your favourite title," said the
Anglo-Briton, "drive not to extremity a plain man, who desires to hold
his duty in all honour to the imperial family. The Princess, wife of
the Caesar, and born, you tell me, of a purple colour, has now
inherited, notwithstanding, the features of a most lovely woman. She
hath composed a history, of which I presume not to form a judgment,
since I cannot understand it; she sings like an angel; and to conclude,
after the fashion of the knights of this day--though I deal not
ordinarily with their language--I would say cheerfully, that I am ready
to place myself in lists against any one whomsoever, who dares detract
from the beauty of the imperial Anna Comnena's person, or from the
virtues of her mind. Having said this, my noble captain, we have said
all that it is competent for you to inquire into, or for me to answer.
That there are hansomer women than the Princess, is unquestionable; and
I question it the less, that I have myself seen a person whom I think
far her superior; and with that let us close the dialogue."

"Thy beauty, thou unparalleled fool," said Achilles, "must, I ween, be
the daughter of the large-bodied northern boor, living next door to him
upon whose farm was brought up the person of an ass, curst with such
intolerable want of judgment."

"You may say your pleasure, captain," replied Hereward: "because it is
the safer for us both that thou canst not on such a topic either offend
me, who hold thy judgment as light as thou canst esteem mine, or speak
any derogation of a person whom you never saw, but whom, if you had
seen, perchance I might not so patiently have brooked any reflections
upon, even at the hands of a military superior."

Achilles Tatius had a good deal of the penetration necessary for one in
his situation. He never provoked to extremity the daring spirits whom
he commanded, and never used any freedom with them beyond the extent
that he knew their patience could bear. Hereward was a favourite
soldier, and had, in that respect at least, a sincere liking and regard
for his commander: when, therefore, the Follower, instead of resenting
his petulance, good-humouredly apologized for having hurt his feelings,
the momentary displeasure between them was at an end; the officer at
once reassumed his superiority, and the soldier sunk back with a deep
sigh, given to some period which was long past, into his wonted silence
and reserve. Indeed the Follower had another and further design upon
Hereward, of which he was as yet unwilling to do more than give a
distant hint.

After a long pause, during which they approached the barracks, a gloomy
fortified building constructed for the residence of their corps, the
captain motioned his soldier to draw close up to his side, and
proceeded to ask him, in a confidential tone--"Hereward, my friend,
although it is scarce to be supposed that in the presence of the
imperial family thou shouldst mark any one who did not partake of their
blood, or rather, as Homer has it, who did not participate of the
divine _ichor_, which, in their sacred persons, supplies the place of
that vulgar fluid; yet, during so long an audience, thou mightst
possibly, from his uncourtly person and attire, have distinguished
Agelastes, whom we courtiers call the Elephant, from his strict
observation of the rule which forbids any one to sit down or rest in
the Imperial presence?"

"I think," replied the soldier, "I marked the man you mean; his age was
some seventy and upwards,--a big burly person;--and the baldness which
reached to the top of his head was well atoned for by a white beard of
prodigious size, which descended in waving curls over his breast, and
reached to the towel with which his loins were girded, instead of the
silken sash used by other persons of rank."

"Most accurately marked, my Varangian," said the officer. "What else
didst thou note about this person?"

"His cloak was in its texture as coarse as that of the meanest of the
people, but it was strictly clean, as if it had been the intention of
the wearer to exhibit poverty, or carelessness and contempt of dress,
avoiding, at the same time, every particular which implied anything
negligent, sordid, or disgusting."

"By St. Sophia!" said the officer, "thou astonishest me! The Prophet
Baalam was not more surprised when his ass turned round her head and
spoke to him!--And what else didst thou note concerning this man? I see
those who meet thee must beware of thy observation, as well as of thy
battle-axe."

"If it please your Valour" answered the soldier, "we English have eyes
as well as hands; but it is only when discharging our duty that we
permit our tongues to dwell on what we have observed. I noted but
little of this man's conversation, but from what I heard, it seemed he
was not unwilling to play what we call the jester, or jack-pudding, in
the conversation, a character which, considering the man's age and
physiognomy, is not, I should be tempted to say, natural, but assumed
for some purpose of deeper import."

"Hereward," answered his officer, "thou hast spoken like an angel sent
down to examine men's bosoms: that man, Agelastes, is a contradiction,
such as earth has seldom witnessed. Possessing all that wisdom which in
former times united the sages of this nation with the gods themselves,
Agelastes has the same cunning as the elder Brutus, who disguised his
talents under the semblance of an idle jester. He appears to seek no
office--he desires no consideration--he pays suit at court only when
positively required to do so; yet what shall I say, my soldier,
concerning the cause of an influence gained without apparent effort,
and extending almost into the very thoughts of men, who appear to act
as he would desire, without his soliciting them to that purpose? Men
say strange things concerning the extent of his communications with
other beings, whom our fathers worshipped with prayer and sacrifice. I
am determined, however, to know the road by which he climbs so high and
so easily towards the point to which all men aspire at court, and it
will go hard but he shall either share his ladder with me, or I will
strike its support from under him. Thee, Hereward, I have chosen to
assist me in this matter, as the knights among these Frankish infidels
select, when going upon an adventure, a sturdy squire, or inferior
attendant, to share the dangers and the recompense; and this I am moved
to, as much by the shrewdness thou hast this night manifested, as by
the courage which thou mayst boast, in common with, or rather beyond,
thy companions."

"I am obliged, and I thank your Valour," replied the Varangian, more
coldly perhaps than his officer expected; "I am ready, as is my duty,
to serve you in anything consistent with God and the Emperor's claims
upon my service. I would only say, that, as a sworn inferior soldier, I
will do nothing contrary to the laws of the empire, and, as a sincere
though ignorant Christian, I will have nothing to do with the gods of
the heathens, save to defy them in the name and strength of the holy
saints."

"Idiot!" said Achilles Tatius, "dost thou think that I, already
possessed of one of the first dignities of the empire, could meditate
anything contrary to the interests of Alexius Comnenus? or, what would
be scarce more atrocious, that I, the chosen friend and ally of the
reverend Patriarch Zosimus, should meddle with anything bearing a
relation, however remote, to heresy or idolatry?"

"Truly," answered the Varangian, "no one would be more surprised or
grieved than I should; but when we walk in a labyrinth, we must assume
and announce that we have a steady and forward purpose, which is one
mode at least of keeping a straight path. The people of this country
have so many ways of saying the same thing, that one can hardly know at
last what is their real meaning. We English, on the other hand, can
only express ourselves in one set of words, but it is one out of which
all the ingenuity of the world could not extract a double meaning."

"'Tis well," said his officer, "to-morrow we will talk more of this,
for which purpose thou wilt come to my quarters a little after sunset.
And, hark thee, to-morrow, while the sun is in heaven, shall be thine
own, either to sport thyself or to repose. Employ thy time in the
latter, by my advice, since to-morrow night, like the present, may find
us both watchers."

So saying, they entered the barracks, where they parted company--the
commander of the life-guards taking his way to a splendid set of
apartments which belonged to him in that capacity, and the Anglo-Saxon
seeking his humble accommodations as a subaltern officer of the same
corps.




CHAPTER THE SEVENTH.

     Such forces met not, nor so vast a camp,
     When Agrican, with all his northern powers,
     Besieged Albraeca, as romances tell.
     The city of Gallaphron, from thence to win
     The fairest of her sex, Angelica,
     His daughter, sought by many prowess'd knights,
     Both Paynim, and the Peers of Charlemagne.
                        PARADISE REGAINED.


Early on the morning of the day following that which we have
commemorated, the Imperial Council was assembled, where the number of
general officers with sounding titles, disguised under a thin veil the
real weakness of the Grecian empire. The commanders were numerous and
the distinctions of their rank minute, but the soldiers were very few
in comparison. The offices formerly filled by prefects, praetors, and
questors, were now held by persons who had gradually risen into the
authority of those officers, and who, though designated from their
domestic duties about the Emperor, yet, from that very circumstance,
possessed what, in that despotic court, was the most effectual source
of power. A long train of officers entered the great hall of the Castle
of Blacquernal, and proceeded so far together as their different grades
admitted, while in each chamber through which they passed in
succession, a certain number of the train whose rank permitted them to
advance no farther, remained behind the others. Thus, when the interior
cabinet of audience was gained, which was not until their passage
through ten anterooms, five persons only found themselves in the
presence of the Emperor in this innermost and most sacred recess of
royalty, decorated by all the splendour of the period.

The Emperor Alexius sat upon a stately throne, rich with barbaric gems
and gold, and flanked on either hand, in imitation probably of
Solomon's magnificence, with the form of a couchant lion in the same
precious metal. Not to dwell upon other marks of splendour, a tree
whose trunk seemed also of gold, shot up behind the throne, which it
over-canopied with its branches. Amid the boughs were birds of various
kinds curiously wrought and enamelled, and fruit composed of precious
stones seemed to glisten among the leaves. Five officers alone, the
highest in the state, had the privilege of entering this sacred recess
when the Emperor held council. These were--the Grand Domestic, who
might be termed of rank with a modern prime minister--the Logothete, or
chancellor--the Protospathaire, or commander of the guards, already
mentioned--the Acolyte, or Follower, and leader of the Varangians--and
the Patriarch.

The doors of this secret apartment, and the adjacent antechamber, were
guarded by six deformed Nubian slaves, whose writhen and withered
countenances formed a hideous contrast with their snow-white dresses
and splendid equipment. They were mutes, a species of wretches borrowed
from the despotism of the East, that they might be unable to proclaim
the deeds of tyranny of which they were the unscrupulous agents. They
were generally held in a kind of horror, rather than compassion, for
men considered that slaves of this sort had a malignant pleasure in
avenging upon others the irreparable wrongs which had severed
themselves from humanity. It was a general custom, though, like many
other usages of the Greeks, it would be held childish in modern times,
that by means of machinery easily conceived, the lions, at the entrance
of a stranger, were made, as it were, to rouse themselves and roar,
after which a wind seemed to rustle the foliage of the tree, the birds
hopped from branch to branch, pecked the fruit, and appeared to fill
the chamber with their carolling. This display had alarmed many an
ignorant foreign ambassador, and even the Grecian counsellors
themselves were expected to display the same sensations of fear,
succeeded by surprise, when they heard the roar of the lions, followed
by the concert of the birds, although perhaps it was for the fiftieth
time. On this occasion, as a proof of the urgency of the present
meeting of the council, these ceremonies were entirely omitted.

The speech of the Emperor himself seemed to supply by its commencement
the bellowing of the lions, while it ended in a strain more resembling
the warbling of the birds.

In his first sentences, he treated of the audacity and unheard-of
boldness of the millions of Franks, who, under the pretence of wresting
Palestine from the infidels, had ventured to invade the sacred
territories of the empire. He threatened them with such chastisement as
his innumerable forces and officers would, he affirmed, find it easy to
inflict. To all this the audience, and especially the military
officers, gave symptoms of ready assent. Alexius, however, did not long
persist in the warlike intentions which he at first avowed. The Franks,
he at length seemed to reflect, were, in profession, Christians. They
might possibly be serious in their pretext of the crusade, in which
case their motives claimed a degree of indulgence, and, although
erring, a certain portion of respect. Their numbers also were great,
and their valour could not be despised by those who had seen them fight
at Durazzo, [Footnote: For the battle of Durazzo, Oct. 1081, in which
Alexius was defeated with great slaughter by Robert Guiscard, and
escaped only by the swiftness of his horse, see Gibbon, ch. 56.] and
elsewhere. They might also, by the permission of Supreme Providence,
be, in the long run, the instruments of advantage to the most sacred
empire, though they approached it with so little ceremony. He had,
therefore, mingling the virtues of prudence, humanity, and generosity,
with that valour which must always burn in the heart of an Emperor,
formed a plan, which he was about to submit to their consideration, for
present execution; and, in the first place, he requested of the Grand
Domestic, to let him know what forces he might count upon on the
western side of the Bosphorus.

"Innumerable are the forces of the empire as the stars in heaven, or
the sand on the sea-shore," answered the Grand Domestic.

"That is a goodly answer," said the Emperor, "provided there were
strangers present at this conference; but since we hold consultation in
private, it is necessary that I know precisely to what number that army
amounts which I have to rely upon. Reserve your eloquence till some
fitter time, and let me know what you, at this present moment, mean by
the word _innumerable?_"

The Grand Domestic paused, and hesitated for a short space; but as he
became aware that the moment was one in which the Emperor could not be
trifled with, (for Alexius Comnenus was at times dangerous,) he
answered thus, but not without hesitation. "Imperial master and lord,
none better knows that such an answer cannot be hastily made, if it is
at the same time to be correct in its results. The number of the
imperial host betwixt this city and the western frontier of the empire,
deducting those absent on furlough, cannot be counted upon as amounting
to more than twenty-five thousand men, or thirty thousand at most."

Alexius struck his forehead with his hand; and the counsellors, seeing
him give way to such violent expressions of grief and surprise, began
to enter into discussions, which they would otherwise have reserved for
a fitter place and time.

"By the trust your Highness reposes in me," said the Logothete, "there
has been drawn from your Highness's coffers during the last year, gold
enough to pay double the number of the armed warriors whom the Grand
Domestic now mentions."

"Your Imperial Highness," retorted the impeached minister, with no
small animation, "will at once remember the stationary garrisons, in
addition to the movable troops, for which this figure-caster makes no
allowance."

"Peace, both of you!" said Alexius, composing himself hastily; "our
actual numbers are in truth less than we counted on, but let us not by
wrangling augment the difficulties of the time. Let those troops be
dispersed in valleys, in passes, behind ridges of hills, and in
difficult ground, where a little art being used in the position, can
make few men supply the appearance of numbers, between this city and
the western frontier of the empire. While this disposal is made, we
will continue to adjust with these crusaders, as they call themselves,
the terms on which we will consent to let them pass through our
dominions; nor are we without hope of negotiating with them, so as to
gain great advantage to our kingdom. We will insist that they pass
through our country only by armies of perhaps fifty thousand at once,
whom we will successively transport into Asia, so that no greater
number shall, by assembling beneath our walls, ever endanger the safety
of the metropolis of the world.

"On their way towards the banks of the Bosphorus, we will supply them
with provisions, if they march peaceably, and in order; and if any
straggle from their standards, or insult the country by marauding, we
suppose our valiant peasants will not hesitate to repress their
excesses, and that without our giving positive orders, since we would
not willingly be charged with any thing like a breach of engagement. We
suppose, also, that the Scythians, Arabs, Syrians, and other
mercenaries in our service, will not suffer our subjects to be
overpowered in their own just defence; as, besides that there is no
justice in stripping our own country of provisions, in order to feed
strangers, we will not be surprised nor unpardonably displeased to
learn, that of the ostensible quantity of flour, some sacks should be
found filled with chalk, or lime, or some such substance. It is,
indeed, truly wonderful, what the stomach of a Frank will digest
comfortably. Their guides, also, whom you shall choose with reference
to such duty, will take care to conduct the crusaders by difficult and
circuitous routes; which will be doing them a real service, by inuring
them to the hardships of the country and climate, which they would
otherwise have to face without seasoning.

"In the meantime, in your intercourse with their chiefs, whom they call
counts, each of whom thinks himself as great as an Emperor, you will
take care to give no offence to their natural presumption, and omit no
opportunity of informing them of the wealth and bounty of our
government. Sums of money may be even given to persons of note, and
largesses of less avail to those under them. You, our Logothete, will
take good order for this, and you, our Grand Domestic, will take care
that such soldiers as may cut off detached parties of the Franks shall
be presented, if possible, in savage dress, and under the show of
infidels. In commending these injunctions to your care, I purpose that,
the crusaders having found the value of our friendship, and also in
some sort the danger of our enmity, those whom we shall safely
transport to Asia, shall be, however unwieldy, still a smaller and more
compact body, whom we may deal with in all Christian prudence. Thus, by
using fair words to one, threats to another, gold to the avaricious,
power to the ambitious, and reasons to those that are capable of
listening to them, we doubt not but to prevail upon those Franks, met
as they are from a thousand points, and enemies of each other, to
acknowledge us as their common superior, rather than choose a leader
among themselves, when they are made aware of the great fact, that
every village in Palestine, from Dan to Beersheba, is the original
property of the sacred Roman empire, and that whatever Christian goes
to war for their recovery, must go as our subject, and hold any
conquest which he may make, as our vassal. Vice and virtue, sense and
folly, ambition and disinterested devotion, will alike recommend to the
survivors of these singular-minded men, to become the feudatories of
the empire, not its foe, and the shield, not the enemy, of your
paternal Emperor."

There was a general inclination of the head among the courtiers, with
the Eastern acclamation of,--"Long live the Emperor!"

When the murmur of this applausive exclamation had subsided, Alexius
proceeded:--"Once more, I say, that my faithful Grand Domestic, and
those who act under him, will take care to commit the execution of such
part of these orders as may seem aggressive, to troops of foreign
appearance and language, which, I grieve to say, are more numerous in
our imperial army than our natural-born and orthodox subjects."

The Patriarch here interposed his opinion.--"There is a consolation,"
he said,"in the thought, that the genuine Romans in the imperial army
are but few, since a trade so bloody as war, is most fitly prosecuted
by those whose doctrines, as well as their doings, on earth, merit
eternal condemnation in the next world."

"Reverend Patriarch," said the Emperor, "we would not willingly hold
with the wild infidels, that Paradise is to be gained by the sabre;
nevertheless, we would hope that a Roman dying in battle for his
religion and his Emperor, may find as good hope of acceptation, after
the mortal pang is over, as a man who dies in peace, and with unblooded
hand."

"It is enough for me to say," resumed the Patriarch, "that the Church's
doctrine is not so indulgent: she is herself peaceful, and her promises
of favour are for those who have been men of peace. Yet think not I bar
the gates of Heaven against a soldier, as such, if believing all the
doctrines of our Church, and complying with all our observances; far
less would I condemn your Imperial Majesty's wise precautions, both for
diminishing the power and thinning the ranks of those Latin heretics,
who come hither to despoil us, and plunder perhaps both church and
temple, under the vain pretext that Heaven would permit them, stained
with so many heresies, to reconquer that Holy Land, which true orthodox
Christians, your Majesty's sacred predecessors, have not been enabled
to retain from the infidel. And well I trust that no settlement made
under the Latins will be permitted by your Majesty to establish itself,
in which the Cross shall not be elevated with limbs of the same length,
instead of that irregular and most damnable error which prolongs, in
western churches, the nether limb of that most holy emblem."

"Reverend Patriarch," answered the Emperor, "do not deem that we think
lightly of your weighty scruples; but the question is now, not in what
manner we may convert these Latin heretics to the true faith, but how
we may avoid being overrun by their myriads, which resemble those of
the locusts by which their approach was preceded and intimated."

"Your Majesty," said the Patriarch, "will act with your usual wisdom;
for my part, I have only stated my doubts, that I may save my own soul
alive."

"Our construction," said the Emperor, "does your sentiments no wrong,
most reverend Patriarch; and you," addressing himself to the other
counsellors, "will attend to these separate charges given out for
directing the execution of the commands which have been generally
intimated to you. They are written out in the sacred ink, and our
sacred subscription is duly marked with the fitting tinge of green and
purple. Let them, therefore, be strictly obeyed. Ourselves will assume
the command of such of the Immortal Bands as remain in the city, and
join to them the cohorts of our faithful Varangians. At the head of
these troops, we will await the arrival of these strangers under the
walls of the city, and, avoiding combat while our policy can postpone
it, we will be ready, in case of the worst, to take whatsoever chance
it shall please the Almighty to send us."

Here the council broke up, and the different chiefs began to exert
themselves in the execution of their various instructions, civil and
military, secret or public, favourable or hostile to the crusaders. The
peculiar genius of the Grecian people was seen upon this occasion.
Their loud and boastful talking corresponded with the ideas which the
Emperor wished to enforce upon the crusaders concerning the extent of
his power and resources. Nor is it to be disguised, that the wily
selfishness of most of those in the service of Alexius, endeavoured to
find some indirect way of applying the imperial instruction, so as
might best suit their own private ends.

Meantime, the news had gone abroad in Constantinople of the arrival of
the huge miscellaneous army of the west upon the limits of the Grecian
empire, arid of their purpose to pass to Palestine. A thousand reports
magnified, if that was possible, an event so wonderful. Some said, that
their ultimate view was the conquest of Arabia, the destruction of the
Prophet's tomb, and the conversion of his green banner into a
horse-cloth for the King of France's brother. Others supposed that the
ruin and sack of Constantinople was the real object of the war. A third
class thought it was in order to compel the Patriarch to submit himself
to the Pope, adopt the Latin form of the cross, and put an end to the
schism.

The Varangians enjoyed an addition to this wonderful news, seasoned as
it everywhere was with something peculiarly suited to the prejudices of
the hearers. It was gathered originally from what our friend Hereward,
who was one of their inferior officers, called sergeants or constables,
had suffered to transpire of what he had heard the preceding evening.
Considering that the fact must be soon matter of notoriety, he had no
hesitation to give his comrades to understand that a Norman army was
coming hither under Duke Robert, the son of the far-famed William the
Conqueror, and with hostile intentions, he concluded, against them in
particular. Like all other men in peculiar circumstances, the
Varangians adopted an explanation applicable to their own condition.
These Normans, who hated the Saxon nation, and had done so much to
dishonour and oppress them, were now following them, they supposed, to
the foreign capital where they had found refuge, with the purpose of
making war on the bountiful prince who protected their sad remnant.
Under this belief, many a deep oath was sworn in Norse and Anglo-Saxon,
that their keen battle-axes should avenge the slaughter of Hastings,
and many a pledge, both in wine and ale, was quaffed who should most
deeply resent, and most effectually revenge, the wrongs which the
Anglo-Saxons of England had received at the hand of their oppressors.

Hereward, the author of this intelligence, began soon to be sorry that
he had ever suffered it to escape him, so closely was he cross-examined
concerning its precise import, by the enquiries of his comrades, from
whom he thought himself obliged to keep concealed the adventures of the
preceding evening, and the place in which he had gained his information.

About noon, when he was effectually tired with returning the same
answer to the same questions, and evading similar others which were
repeatedly put to him, the sound of trumpets announced the presence of
the Acolyte, Achilles Tatius, who came immediately, it was
industriously whispered, from the sacred Interior, with news of the
immediate approach of war.

The Varangians, and the Roman bands called Immortal, it was said, were
to form a camp under the city, in order to be prompt to defend it at
the shortest notice. This put the whole barracks into commotion, each
man making the necessary provision for the approaching campaign. The
noise was chiefly that of joyful bustle and acclamation; and it was so
general, that Hereward, whose rank permitted him to commit to a page or
esquire the task of preparing his equipments, took the opportunity to
leave the barracks, in order to seek some distant place apart from his
comrades, and enjoy his solitary reflections upon the singular
connexion into which he had been drawn, and his direct communication
with the Imperial family.

Passing through the narrow streets, then deserted, on account of the
heat of the sun, he reached at length one of those broad terraces,
which, descending as it were by steps, upon the margin of the
Bosphorus, formed one of the most splendid walks in the universe, and
still, it is believed, preserved as a public promenade for the pleasure
of the Turks, as formerly for that of the Christians. These graduated
terraces were planted with many trees, among which the cypress, as
usual, was most generally cultivated. Here bands of the inhabitants
were to be seen: some passing to and fro, with business and anxiety in
their faces; some standing still in groups, as if discussing the
strange and weighty tidings of the day, and some, with the indolent
carelessness of an eastern climate, eating their noontide refreshment
in the shade, and spending their time as if their sole object was to
make much of the day as it passed, and let the cares of to-morrow
answer for themselves.

While the Varangian, afraid of meeting some acquaintance in this
concourse, which would have been inconsistent with the desire of
seclusion which had brought him thither, descended or passed from one
terrace to another, all marked him with looks of curiosity and enquiry,
considering him to be one, who, from his arms and connexion with the
court, must necessarily know more than others concerning the singular
invasion by numerous enemies, and from various quarters, which was the
news of the day.

None, however, had the hardihood to address the soldier of the guard,
though all looked at him with uncommon interest. He walked from the
lighter to the darker alleys, from the more closed to the more open
terraces, without interruption from any one, yet not without a feeling
that he must not consider himself as alone.

The desire that he felt to be solitary rendered him at last somewhat
watchful, so that he became sensible that he was dogged by a black
slave, a personage not so unfrequent in the streets of Constantinople
as to excite any particular notice. His attention, however, being at
length fixed on this individual, he began to be desirous to escape his
observation; and the change of place which he had at first adopted to
avoid society in general, he had now recourse to, in order to rid
himself of this distant, though apparently watchful attendant. Still,
however, though he by change of place had lost sight of the negro for a
few minutes, it was not long ere he again discovered him at a distance
too far for a companion, but near enough to serve all the purposes of a
spy. Displeased at this, the Varangian turned short in his walk, and
choosing a spot where none was in sight but the object of his
resentment, walked suddenly up to him, and demanded wherefore, and by
whose orders, he presumed to dog his footsteps. The negro answered in a
jargon as bad as that in which he was addressed though of a different
kind, "that he had orders to remark whither he went."

"Orders from whom?" said the Varangian.

"From my master and yours," answered the negro, boldly.

"Thou infidel villain!" exclaimed the angry soldier, "when was it that
we became fellow-servants, and who is it that thou darest to call my
master?"

"One who is master of the world," said the slave, "since he commands
his own passions."

"I shall scarce command mine," said the Varangian, "if thou repliest to
my earnest questions with thine affected quirks of philosophy. Once
more, what dost thou want with me? and why hast thou the boldness to
watch me?"

"I have told thee already," said the slave, "that I do my master's
commands."

"But I must know who thy master is," said Hereward.

"He must tell thee that himself," replied the negro; "he trusts not a
poor slave like me with the purpose of the errands on which he sends
me."

"He has left thee a tongue, however," said the Varangian, "which some
of thy countrymen would. I think, be glad to possess. Do not provoke me
to abridge it by refusing me the information which I have a right to
demand."

The black meditated, as it seemed from the grin on his face, further
evasions, when Hereward cut them short by raising the staff of his
battle-axe. "Put me not" he said, "to dishonour myself by striking thee
with this weapon, calculated for a use so much more noble."

"I may not do so, valiant sir," said the negro, laying aside an
impudent, half-gibing tone which he had hitherto made use of, and
betraying personal fear in his manner. "If you beat the poor slave to
death, you cannot learn what his master hath forbid him to tell. A
short walk will save your honour the stain, and yourself the trouble,
of beating what cannot resist, and me the pain of enduring what I can
neither retaliate nor avoid."

"Lead on then," said the Varangian. "Be assured thou shalt not fool me
by thy fair words, and I will know the person who is impudent enough to
assume the right of watching my motions."

The black walked on with a species of leer peculiar to his physiognomy,
which might be construed as expressive either of malice or of mere
humour. The Varangian followed him with some suspicion, for it happened
that he had had little intercourse with the unhappy race of Africa, and
had not totally overcome the feeling of surprise with which he had at
first regarded them, when he arrived a stranger from the north. So
often did this man look back upon him during their walk, and with so
penetrating and observing a cast of countenance, that Hereward felt
irresistibly renewed in his mind the English prejudices, which assigned
to the demons the sable colour and distorted cast of visage of his
conductor. The scene into which he was guided, strengthened an
association which was not of itself unlikely to occur to the ignorant
and martial islander.

The negro led the way from the splendid terraced walks which we have
described, to a path descending to the sea-shore, when a place
appeared, which, far from being trimmed, like other parts of the coast,
into walks of embankments, seemed, on the contrary, abandoned to
neglect, and was covered with the mouldering ruins of antiquity, where
these had not been overgrown by the luxuriant vegetation of the
climate. These fragments of building, occupying a sort of recess of the
bay, were hidden by steep banks on each side, and although in fact they
formed part of the city, yet they were not seen from any part of it,
and, embosomed in the manner we have described, did not in turn command
any view of the churches, palaces, towers, and fortifications, amongst
which they lay. The sight of this solitary, and apparently deserted
spot, encumbered with ruins, and overgrown with cypress and other
trees, situated as it was in the midst of a populous city, had
something in it impressive and awful to the imagination. The ruins were
of an ancient date, and in the style of a foreign people. The gigantic
remains of a portico, the mutilated fragments of statues of great size,
but executed in a taste and attitude so narrow and barbaric as to seem
perfectly the reverse of the Grecian, and the half-defaced
hieroglyphics which could be traced on some part of the decayed
sculpture, corroborated the popular account of their origin, which we
shall briefly detail.

According to tradition, this had been a temple dedicated to the
Egyptian goddess Cybele, built while the Roman Empire was yet heathen,
and while Constantinople was still called by the name of Byzantium. It
is well known that the superstition of the Egyptians--vulgarly gross in
its literal meaning as well as in its mystical interpretation, and
peculiarly the foundation of many wild doctrines,--was disowned by the
principles of general toleration, and the system of polytheism received
by Rome, and was excluded by repeated laws from the respect paid by the
empire to almost every other religion, however extravagant or absurd.
Nevertheless, these Egyptian rites had charms for the curious and the
superstitious, and had, after long opposition, obtained a footing in
the empire.

Still, although tolerated, the Egyptian priests were rather considered
as sorcerers than as pontiffs, and their whole ritual had a nearer
relation, to magic in popular estimation, than to any regular system of
devotion.

Stained with these accusations, even among the heathen themselves, the
worship of Egypt was held in more mortal abhorrence by the Christians,
than the other and more rational kinds of heathen devotion; that is, if
any at all had a right to be termed so. The brutal worship of Apis and
Cybele was regarded, not only as a pretext for obscene and profligate
pleasures, but as having a direct tendency to open and encourage a
dangerous commerce with evil spirits, who were supposed to take upon
themselves, at these unhallowed altars, the names and characters of
these foul deities. Not only, therefore, the temple of Cybele, with its
gigantic portico, its huge and inelegant statues, and its fantastic
hieroglyphics, was thrown down and defaced when the empire was
converted to the Christian faith, but the very ground on which it stood
was considered as polluted and unhallowed; and no Emperor having yet
occupied the site with a Christian church, the place still remained
neglected and deserted as we have described it.

The Varangian Hereward was perfectly acquainted with the evil
reputation of the place; and when the negro seemed disposed to advance
into the interior of the ruins, he hesitated, and addressed his guide
thus:--"Hark thee, my black friend, these huge fantastic images, some
having dogs' heads, some cows' heads, and some no heads at all, are not
held reverently in popular estimation. Your own colour, also, my
comrade, is greatly too like that of Satan himself, to render you an
unsuspicious companion amid ruins, in which the false spirit, it is
said, daily walks his rounds. Midnight and Noon are the times, it is
rumoured, of his appearance. I will go no farther with you, unless you
assign me a fit reason for so doing."

"In making so childish a proposal" said the negro, "you take from me,
in effect, all desire to guide you to my master. I thought I spoke to a
man of invincible courage, and of that good sense upon which courage is
best founded. But your valour only emboldens you to beat a black slave,
who has neither strength nor title to resist you; and your courage is
not enough to enable you to look without trembling on the dark side of
a wall, even when the sun is in the heavens."

"Thou art insolent," said Hereward, raising his axe.

"And thou art foolish," said the negro, "to attempt to prove thy
manhood and thy wisdom by the very mode which gives reason for calling
them both in question. I have already said there can be little valour
in beating a wretch like me; and no man, surely, who wishes to discover
his way, would begin by chasing away his guide."

"I follow thee" said Hereward, stung with the insinuation of cowardice;
"but if thou leadest me into a snare, thy free talk shall not save thy
bones, if a thousand of thy complexion, from earth or hell, were
standing ready to back thee."

"Thou objectest sorely to my complexion," said the negro; "how knowest
thou that it is, in fact, a thing to be counted and acted upon as
matter of reality? Thine own eyes daily apprize thee, that the colour
of the sky nightly changes from bright to black, yet thou knowest that
this is by no means owing to any habitual colour of the heavens
themselves. The same change that takes place in the hue of the heavens,
has existence in the tinge of the deep sea--How canst thou tell, but
what the difference of my colour from thine own may be owing to some
deceptions change of a similar nature--not real in itself, but only
creating an apparent reality?"

"Thou mayst have painted thyself, no doubt," answered the Varangian,
upon reflection, "and thy blackness, therefore, may be only apparent;
but I think thy old friend himself could hardly have presented these
grinning lips, with the white teeth and flattened nose, so much to the
life, unless that peculiarity of Nubian physiognomy, as they call it,
had accurately and really an existence; and to save thee some trouble,
my dark friend, I will tell thee, that though thou speakest to an
uneducated Varangian, I am not entirely unskilled in the Grecian art of
making subtle words pass upon the hearers instead of reason."

"Ay?" said the negro, doubtfully, and somewhat surprised; "and may the
slave Diogenes--for so my master has christened me--enquire into the
means by which you reached knowledge so unusual?"

"It is soon told," replied Hereward. "My countryman, Witikind, being a
constable of our bands, retired from active service, and spent the end
of a long life in this city of Constantinople. Being past all toils of
battle, either those of reality, as you word it, or the pomp and
fatigue of the exercising ground, the poor old man, in despair of
something to pass his time, attended the lectures of the philosophers."

"And what did he learn there?" said the negro; "for a barbarian, grown
grey under the helmet, was not, as I think, a very hopeful student in
our schools."

"As much though, I should think, as a menial slave, which I understand
to be thy condition," replied the soldier. "But I have understood from
him, that the masters of this idle science make it their business to
substitute, in their argumentations, mere words instead of ideas; and
as they never agree upon the precise meaning of the former, their
disputes can never arrive at a fair or settled conclusion, since they
do not agree in the language in which they express them. Their
theories, as they call them, are built on the sand, and the wind and
tide shall prevail against them."

"Say so to my master," answered the black, in a serious tone.

"I will," said the Varangian; "and he shall know me as an ignorant
soldier, having but few ideas, and those only concerning my religion
and my military duty. But out of these opinions I will neither be
beaten by a battery of sophisms, nor cheated by the arts or the terrors
of the friends of heathenism, either in this world or the next."

"You may speak your mind to him then yourself," said Diogenes. He
stepped aside as if to make way for the Varangian, to whom he motioned
to go forward.

Hereward advanced accordingly, by a half-worn and almost imperceptible
path leading through the long rough grass, and, turning round a
half-demolished shrine, which exhibited the remains of Apis, the bovine
deity, he came immediately in front of the philosopher, Agelastes, who,
sitting among the ruins, reposed his limbs on the grass.




CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.

     Through the vain webs which puzzle sophists' skill,
     Plain sense and honest meaning work their way;
     So sink the varying clouds upon the hill,
     When the clear dawning--brightens into day.
                                     DR. WATTS.


The old man rose from the ground with alacrity, as Hereward approached.
"My bold Varangian" he said, "thou who valuest men and things not
according to the false estimate ascribed to them in this world, but to
their real importance and actual value, thou art welcome, whatever has
brought thee hither--thou art welcome to a place, where it is held the
best business of philosophy to strip man of his borrowed ornaments, and
reduce him to the just value of his own attributes of body and mind,
singly considered."

"You are a courtier, sir," said the Saxon, "and as a permitted
companion of the Emperor's Highness, you must be aware, that there are
twenty times more ceremonies than such a man as I can be acquainted
with, for regulating the different ranks in society; while a plain man
like myself may be well excused from pushing himself into the company
of those above him, where he does not exactly know how he should
comport himself."

"True," said the philosopher; "but a man like yourself, noble Hereward,
merits more consideration in the eyes of a real philosopher, than a
thousand of those mere insects, whom the smiles of a court call into
life, and whom its frowns reduce to annihilation."

"You are yourself, grave sir, a follower of the court," said Hereward.

"And a most punctilious one," said Agelastes. "There is not, I trust, a
subject in the empire who knows better the ten thousand punctilios
exigible from those of different ranks, and clue to different
authorities. The man is yet to be born who has seen me take advantage
of any more commodious posture than that of standing in presence of the
royal family. But though I use those false scales in society, and so
far conform to its errors, my real judgment is of a more grave
character, and more worthy of man, as said to be formed in the image of
his Creator."

"There can be small occasion," said the Varangian, "to exercise your
judgment in any respect upon me, nor am I desirous that any one should
think of me otherwise than I am; a poor exile, namely, who endeavours
to fix his faith upon Heaven, and to perform his duty to the world he
lives in, and to the prince in whose service he is engaged. And now,
grave sir, permit me to ask, whether this meeting is by your desire,
and for what is its purpose? An African slave, whom I met in the public
walks, and who calls himself Diogenes, tells me that you desired to
speak with me; he hath somewhat the humour of the old scoffer, and so
he may have lied. If so, I will even forgive him the beating which I
owe his assurance, and make my excuse at the same time for having
broken in upon your retirement, which I am totally unfit to share."

"Diogenes has not played you false," answered Agelastes; "he has his
humours, as you remarked even now, and with these some qualities also
that put him upon a level with those of fairer complexion and better
features."

"And for what," said the Varangian, "have you so employed him? Can your
wisdom possibly entertain a wish to converse with me?"

"I am an observer of nature and of humanity," answered the philosopher;
"is it not natural that I should tire of those beings who are formed
entirely upon artifice, and long to see something more fresh from the
hand of nature?"

"You see not that in me," said the Varangian; "the rigour of military
discipline, the camp--the centurion--the armour--frame a man's
sentiments and limbs to them, as the sea-crab is framed to its shell.
See one of us, and you see us all."

"Permit me to doubt that," said Agelastes; "and to suppose that in
Hereward, the son of Waltheoff, I see an extraordinary man, although he
himself may be ignorant, owing to his modesty, of the rarity of his own
good qualities."

"The son of Waltheoff!" answered the Varangian, somewhat startled.--"Do
you know my father's name?"

"Be not surprised," answered the philosopher, "at my possessing so
simple a piece of information. It has cost me but little trouble to
attain it, yet I would gladly hope that the labour I have taken in that
matter may convince you of my real desire to call you friend."

"It was indeed an unusual compliment," said Hereward, "that a man of
your knowledge and station should be at the trouble to enquire, among
the Varangian cohorts, concerning the descent of one of their
constables. I scarcely think that my commander, the Acolyte himself,
would think such knowledge worthy of being collected or preserved."

"Greater men than he," said Agelastes, "certainly would not-----You
know one in high office, who thinks the names of his most faithful
soldiers of less moment than those of his hunting dogs or his hawks,
and would willingly save himself the trouble of calling them otherwise
than by a whistle."

"I may not hear this," answered the Varangian.

"I would not offend you," said the philosopher, "I would not even shake
your good opinion of the person I allude to; yet it surprises me that
such should be entertained by one of your great qualities."

"A truce with this, grave sir, which is in fact trifling in a person of
your character and appearance," answered the Anglo-Saxon. "I am like
the rocks of my country; the fierce winds cannot shake me, the soft
rains cannot melt me; flattery and loud words are alike lost upon me."

"And it is even for that inflexibility of mind," replied Agelastes,
"that steady contempt of every thing that approaches thee, save in the
light of a duty, that I demand, almost like a beggar, that personal
acquaintance, which thou refusest like a churl."

"Pardon me," said Hereward, "if I doubt this. Whatever stories you may
have picked up concerning me, not unexaggerated probably--since the
Greeks do not keep the privilege of boasting so entirely to themselves
but the Varangians have learned a little of it--you can have heard
nothing of me which can authorise your using your present language,
excepting in jest."

"You mistake, my son," said Agelastes; "believe me not a person to mix
in the idle talk respecting you, with your comrades at the ale-cup.
Such as I am, I can strike on this broken image of Anubis"--(here he
touched a gigantic fragment of a statue by his side)--"and bid the
spirit who long prompted the oracle, descend, and once more reanimate
the trembling mass. We that are initiated enjoy high privileges--we
stamp upon those ruined vaults, and the echo which dwells there answers
to our demand. Do not think, that although I crave thy friendship, I
Heed therefore supplicate thee for information either respecting
thyself or others."

"Your words are wonderful," said the Anglo-Saxon; "but by such
promising words I have heard that many souls have been seduced from the
path of heaven. My grandsire, Kenelm, was wont to say, that the fair
words of the heathen philosophy were more hurtful to the Christian
faith than the menaces of the heathen tyrants."

"I know him," said Agelastes. "What avails it whether it was in the
body or in the spirit?--He was converted from the faith of Woden by a
noble monk, and died a priest at the shrine of saint Augustin."
[Footnote: At Canterbury.]

"True"--said Hereward; "all this is certain--and I am the rather bound
to remember his words now that he is dead and gone. When I hardly knew
his meaning, he bid me beware of the doctrine which causeth to err,
which is taught by false prophets, who attest their doctrine by unreal
miracles."

"This," said Agelastes, "is mere superstition. Thy grandsire was a good
and excellent man, but narrow-minded, like other priests; and, deceived
by their example, he wished but to open a small wicket in the gate of
truth, and admit the world only on that limited scale. Seest thou,
Hereward, thy grandsire and most men of religion would fain narrow our
intellect to the consideration of such parts of the Immaterial world as
are essential to our moral guidance here, and our final salvation
hereafter; but it is not the less true, that man has liberty, provided
he has wisdom and courage, to form intimacies with beings more powerful
than himself, who can defy the bounds of space by which he is
circumscribed, and overcome, by their metaphysical powers, difficulties
which, to the timid and unlearned, may appear wild and impossible."

"You talk of a folly," answered Hereward, "at which childhood gapes and
manhood smiles."

"On the contrary," said the sage, "I talk of a longing wish which every
man feels at the bottom of his heart, to hold communication with beings
more powerful than himself, and who are not naturally accessible to our
organs. Believe me, Hereward, so ardent and universal an aspiration had
not existed in our bosoms, had there not also been means, if steadily
and wisely sought, of attaining its accomplishment. I will appeal to
thine own heart, and prove to thee even by a single word, that what I
say is truth. Thy thoughts are even now upon a being long absent or
dead, and with the name of BERTHA, a thousand emotions rush to thy
heart, which in thy ignorance thou hadst esteemed furled up for ever,
like spoils of the dead hung above a tombstone!--Thou startest and
changest thy colour--I joy to see by these signs, that the firmness and
indomitable courage which men ascribe to thee, have left the avenues of
the heart as free as ever to kindly and to generous affections, while
they have barred them against those of fear, uncertainty, and all the
caitiff tribe of meatier sensations. I have proffered to esteem thee,
and I have no hesitation in proving it. I will tell thee, If thou
desirest to know it, the fate of that very Bertha, whose memory thou
hast cherished in thy breast in spite of thee, amidst the toil of the
day and the repose of the night, in the battle and in the truce, when
sporting with thy companions in fields of exercise, or attempting to
prosecute the study of Greek learning, in which if thou wouldst
advance, I can teach it by a short road."

While Agelastes thus spoke, the Varangian in some degree recovered his
composure, and made answer, though his voice was somewhat
tremulous,--"Who thou art, I know not--what thou wouldst with me, I
cannot tell--by what means thou hast gathered intelligence of such
consequence to me, and of so little to another, I have no
conception--But this I know, that by intention or accident, thou hast
pronounced a name which agitates my heart to its deepest recesses; yet
am I a Christian and Varangian, and neither to my God nor to my adopted
prince will I willingly stagger in my faith. What is to be wrought by
idols or by false deities, must be a treason to the real divinity. Nor
is it less certain that thou hast let glance some arrows, though the
rules of thy allegiance strictly forbid it, at the Emperor himself.
Henceforward, therefore, I refuse to communicate with thee, be it for
weal or woe. I am the Emperor's waged soldier, and although I affect
not the nice precisions of respect and obedience, which are exacted in
so many various cases, and by so many various rules, yet I am his
defence, and my battle-axe is his body-guard."

"No one doubts it," said the philosopher. "But art not thou also bound
to a nearer dependence upon' the great Acolyte, Achilles Tatius?"

"No. He is my general, according to the rules of our service," answered
the Varangian; "to me he has always shown himself a kind and
good-natured man, and, his dues of rank apart, I may say has deported
himself as a friend rather than a commander. He is, however, my
master's servant as well as I am; nor do I hold the difference of great
amount, which the word of a man can give or take away at pleasure."

"It is nobly spoken," said Agelastes; "and you yourself are surely
entitled to stand erect before one whom you supersede in courage and in
the art of war."

"Pardon me," returned the Briton, "if I decline the attributed
compliment, as what in no respect belongs to me. The Emperor chooses
his own officers, in respect of their power of serving him as he
desires to be served. In this it is likely I might fail; I have said
already, I owe my Emperor my obedience, my duty, and my service, nor
does it seem to me necessary to carry our explanation farther."

"Singular man!" said Agelastes; "is there nothing than can move thee
but things that are foreign to thyself? The name of thy Emperor and thy
commander are no spell upon thee, and even that of the object thou has
loved"--

Here the Varangian interrupted him.

"I have thought," he said, "upon the words thou hast spoken--thou hast
found the means to shake my heart-strings, but not to unsettle my
principles. I will hold no converse with thee on a matter in which thou
canst not have interest.--Necromancers, it is said, perform their
spells by means of the epithets of the Holiest; no marvel, then, should
they use the names of the purest of his creation to serve their
unhallowed purposes. I will none of such truckling, disgraceful to the
dead perhaps as to the living. Whatever has been thy purpose, old
man--for, think not thy strange words have passed unnoticed--be thou
assured I bear that in my heart which defies alike the seduction of men
and of fiends."

With this the soldier turned, and left the ruined temple, after a
slight inclination of his head to the philosopher.

Agelastes, after the departure of the soldier, remained alone,
apparently absorbed in meditation, until he was suddenly disturbed by
the entrance, into the ruins, of Achilles Tatius. The leader of the
Varangians spoke not until he had time to form some result from the
philosopher's features. He then said, "Thou remainest, sage Agelastes,
confident in the purpose of which we have lately spoke together?"

"I do," said Agelastes, with gravity and firmness.

"But," replied Achilles Tatius, "thou hast not gained to our side that
proselyte, whose coolness and courage would serve us better in our hour
of need than the service of a thousand cold-hearted slaves?"

"I have not succeeded," answered the philosopher.

"And thou dost not blush to own it?" said the imperial officer in reply.

"Thou, the wisest of those who yet pretend to Grecian wisdom, the most
powerful of those who still assert the skill by words, signs, names,
periapts, and spells, to exceed the sphere to which thy faculties
belong, hast been foiled in thy trade of persuasion, like an infant
worsted in debate with its domestic tutor? Out upon thee, that thou
canst not sustain in argument the character which thou wouldst so fain,
assume to thyself!"

"Peace!" said the Grecian. "I have as yet gained nothing, it is true,
over this obstinate and inflexible man; but, Achilles Tatius, neither
have I lost. We both stand where yesterday we did, with this advantage
on my side, that I have suggested to him such an object of interest as
he shall never be able to expel from his mind, until he hath had
recourse to me to obtain farther knowledge concerning it.--And now let
this singular person remain for a time unmentioned; yet, trust me,
though flattery, avarice, and ambition may fail to gain him, a bait
nevertheless remains, that shall make him as completely our own as any
that is bound within our mystic and inviolable contract. Tell me then,
how go on the affairs of the empire? Does this tide of Xiatin warriors,
so strangely set aflowing, still rush on to the banks of the Bosphorus?
and does Alexius still entertain hopes to diminish and divide the
strength of numbers, which he could in vain hope to defy?"

"Something further of intelligence has been gained, even within a very
few hours," answered Achilles Tatius. "Bohemond came to the city with
some six or eight light horse, and in a species of disguise.
Considering how often he had been the Emperor's enemy, his project was
a perilous one. But when is it that these Franks draw back on account
of danger? The Emperor perceived at once that the Count was come to see
what he might obtain, by presenting himself as the very first object of
his liberality, and by offering his assistance as mediator with Godfrey
of Bouillon and the other princes of the crusade."

"It is a species of policy," answered the sage, "for which he would
receive full credit from the Emperor."

Achilles Tatius proceeded:--"Count Bohemond was discovered to the
imperial court as if it were by mere accident, and he was welcomed with
marks of favour and splendour which had never been even mentioned as
being fit for any one of the Frankish race. There was no word of
ancient enmity or of former wars, no mention of Bohemond as the ancient
usurper of Antioch, and the encroacher upon the empire. But thanks to
Heaven were returned on all sides, which had sent a faithful ally to
the imperial assistance at a moment of such imminent peril."

"And what said Bohemond?" enquired the philosopher.

"Little or nothing," said the captain of the Varangians, "until, as I
learned from the domestic slave Narses, a large sum of gold had been
abandoned to him. Considerable districts were afterwards agreed to be
ceded to him, and other advantages granted, on condition he should
stand on this occasion the steady friend of the empire and its master.
Such was the Emperor's munificence towards the greedy barbarian, that a
chamber in the palace was, by chance, as it were, left exposed to his
view, containing large quantities of manufactured silks, of jewellers'
work, of gold and silver, and other articles of great value. When the
rapacious Frank could not forbear some expressions of admiration, he
was assured, that the contents of the treasure-chamber were his own,
provided he valued them as showing forth the warmth and sincerity of
his imperial ally towards his friends; and these precious articles were
accordingly conveyed to the tent of the Norman leader. By such
measures, the Emperor must make himself master of Bohemond, both body
and soul, for the Franks themselves say it is strange to see a man of
undaunted bravery, and towering ambition, so infected, nevertheless,
with avarice, which they term a mean and unnatural vice."

"Bohemond," said Agelastes, "is then the Emperor's for life and
death--always, that is, till the recollection of the royal munificence
be effaced by a greater gratuity. Alexius, proud as he naturally is of
his management with this important chieftain, will no doubt expect to
prevail by his counsels, on most of the other crusaders, and even on
Godfrey of Bouillon himself, to take an oath of submission and fidelity
to the Emperor, which, were it not for the sacred nature of their
warfare, the meanest gentleman among them would not submit to, were it
to be lord of a province. There, then, we rest. A few days must
determine what we have to do. An earlier discovery would be
destruction."

"We meet not then to-night?" said the Acolyte.

"No," replied the sage; "unless we are summoned to that foolish
stage-play or recitation; and then we meet as playthings in the hand of
a silly woman, the spoiled child of a weak-minded parent."

Tatius then took his leave of the philosopher, and, as if fearful of
being seen in each other's company, they left their solitary place of
meeting by different routes. The Varangian, Hereward, received, shortly
after, a summons from his superior, who acquainted him, that he should
not, as formerly intimated, require his attendance that evening.

Achilles then paused, and added,--"Thou hast something on thy lips thou
wouldst say to me, which, nevertheless hesitates to break forth."

"It is only this," answered the soldier: "I have had an interview with
the man called Agelastes, and he seems something so different from what
he appeared when we last spoke of him, that I cannot forbear mentioning
to you what I have seen. He is not an insignificant trifler, whose
object it is to raise a laugh at his own expense, or that of any other.
He is a deep-thinking and far-reaching man, who, for some reason or
other, is desirous of forming friends, and drawing a party to himself.
Your own wisdom will teach you to beware of him."

"Thou art an honest fellow, my poor Hereward," said Achilles Tatius,
with an affectation of good-natured contempt. "Such men as Agelastes do
often frame their severest jests in the shape of formal gravity--they
will pretend to possess the most unbounded power over elements and
elemental spirits--they will make themselves masters of the names and
anecdotes best known to those whom they make their sport; and any one
who shall listen to them, shall, in the words of the Divine Homer, only
expose himself to a flood of inextinguishable laughter. I have often
known him select one of the rawest and most ignorant persons in
presence, and to him for the amusement of the rest, he has pretended to
cause the absent to appear, the distant to draw near, and the dead
themselves to burst the cerements of the grave. Take care, Hereward,
that his arts make not a stain on the credit of one of my bravest
Varangians."

"There is no danger," answered Hereward. "I shall not be fond of being
often with this man. If he jests upon one subject which he hath
mentioned to me, I shall be but too likely to teach him seriousness
after a rough manner. And if he is serious in his pretensions in such
mystical matters, we should, according to the faith of my grandfather,
Kenelm, do insult to the deceased, whose name is taken in the mouth of
a soothsayer, or impious enchanter. I will not, therefore, again go
near this Agelastes, be he wizard, or be he impostor."

"You apprehend me not," said the Acolyte, hastily; "you mistake my
meaning. He is a man from whom, if he pleases to converse with such as
you, you may derive much knowledge; keeping out of the reach of those
pretended secret arts, which he will only use to turn thee into
ridicule." With these words, which he himself would perhaps have felt
it difficult to reconcile, the leader and his follower parted.




CHAPTER THE NINTH.

     Between the foaming jaws of the white torrent,
     The skilful artist draws a sudden mound;
     By level long he subdivides their strength,
     Stealing the waters from their rocky bed,
     First to diminish what he means to conquer;
     Then, for the residue he forms a road,
     Easy to keep, and painful to desert,
     And guiding to the end the planner aim'd at.
                     THE ENGINEER


It would have been easy for Alexius, by a course of avowed suspicion,
or any false step in the manner of receiving this tumultuary invasion
of the European nations, to have blown into a flame the numerous but
smothered grievances under which they laboured; and a similar
catastrophe would not have been less certain, had he at once abandoned
all thoughts of resistance, and placed his hope of safety in
surrendering to the multitudes of the west whatsoever they accounted
worth taking. The Emperor chose a middle course; and, unquestionably,
in the weakness of the Greek empire, it was the only one which would
have given him at once safety, and a great degree of consequence in the
eyes of the Frank invaders and those of his own subjects. The means
with, which he acted were of various kinds, and, rather from policy
than inclination, were often stained with falsehood or meanness;
therefore it follows that the measures of the Emperor resembled those
of the snake, who twines himself through the grass, with the purpose of
stinging insidiously those whom he fears to approach with the step of
the bold and generous lion. We are not, however, writing the History of
the Crusades, and what we have already said of the Emperor's
precautions on the first appearance of Godfrey of Bouillon, and his
associates, may suffice for the elucidation of our story.

About four weeks had now passed over, marked by quarrels and
reconcilements between the crusaders and the Grecians of the empire.
The former were, as Alexius's policy dictated, occasionally and
individually, received with extreme honour, and their leaders loaded
with respect and favour; while, from time to time, such bodies of them
as sought distant or circuitous routes to the capital, were intercepted
and cut to pieces by light-armed troops, who easily passed upon their
ignorant opponents for Turks, Scythians, or other infidels, and
sometimes were actually such, but in the service of the Grecian
monarch. Often, too, it happened, that while the more powerful chiefs
of the crusade were feasted by the Emperor and his ministers with the
richest delicacies, and their thirst slaked with iced wines, their
followers were left at a distance, where, intentionally supplied with
adulterated flour, tainted provisions, and bad water, they contracted
diseases, and died in great numbers, without having once seen a foot of
the Holy Land, for the recovery of which they had abandoned their
peace, their competence, and their native country. These aggressions
did not pass without complaint. Many of the crusading chiefs impugned
the fidelity of their allies, exposed the losses sustained by their
armies as evils voluntarily inflicted on them by the Greeks, and on
more than one occasion, the two nations stood opposed to each other on
such terms that a general war seemed to be inevitable.

Alexius, however, though obliged to have recourse to every finesse,
still kept his ground, and made peace with the most powerful chiefs,
under one pretence or other. The actual losses of the crusaders by the
sword he imputed to their own aggressions--their misguidance, to
accident and to wilfulness--the effects produced on them by the
adulterated provisions, to the vehemence of their own appetite for raw
fruits and unripened wines. In short, there was no disaster of any kind
whatsoever which could possibly befall the unhappy pilgrims, but the
Emperor stood prepared to prove that it was the natural consequence of
their own violence, wilfulness of conduct, or hostile precipitancy.

The chiefs, who were not ignorant of their strength, would not, it was
likely, have tamely suffered injuries from a power so inferior to their
own, were it not that they had formed extravagant ideas of the wealth
of the Eastern empire, which Alexius seemed willing to share with them
with an excess of bounty as new to the leaders as the rich productions
of the East were tempting to their followers.

The French nobles would perhaps have been the most difficult to be
brought into order when differences arose; but an accident, which the
Emperor might have termed providential, reduced the high-spirited Count
of Vermandois to the situation, of a suppliant, when he expected to
hold that of a dictator. A fierce tempest surprised his fleet after he
set sail from Italy, and he was finally driven on the coast of Greece.
Many ships were destroyed, and those troops who got ashore were so much
distressed, that they were obliged to surrender themselves to the
lieutenants of Alexius. So that the Count of Vermandois, so haughty in
his bearing when he first embarked, was sent to the court of
Constantinople, not as a prince, but as a prisoner. In this case, the
Emperor instantly set the soldiers at liberty, and loaded them with
presents. [Footnote: See Mills' History of the Crusades, vol. i, p. 96]

Grateful, therefore, for attentions in which Alexius was unremitting,
Count Hugh was by gratitude as well as interest, inclined to join the
opinion of those who, for other reasons, desired the subsistence of
peace betwixt the crusaders and the empire of Greece. A better
principle determined the celebrated Godfrey, Raymond of Thoulouse, and
some others, in whom devotion was something more than a mere burst of
fanaticism. These princes considered with what scandal their whole
journey must be stained, if the first of their exploits should be a war
upon the Grecian empire, which might justly be called the barrier of
Christendom. If it was weak, and at the same time rich--if at the same
time it invited rapine, and was unable to protect itself against it--it
was the more their interest and duty, as Christian soldiers, to protect
a Christian state, whose existence was of so much consequence to the
common cause, even when it could not defend itself. It was the wish of
these frank-hearted men to receive the Emperor's professions of
friendship with such sincere returns of amity--to return his kindness
with so much usury, as to convince him that their purpose towards him
was in every respect fair and honourable, and that it would be his
interest to abstain from every injurious treatment which might induce
or compel them to alter their measures towards him.

It was with this accommodating spirit towards Alexius, which, for many
different and complicated reasons, had now animated most of the
crusaders, that the chiefs consented to a measure which, in other
circumstances, they would probably have refused, as undue to the
Greeks, and dishonourable to themselves. This was the famous
resolution, that, before crossing the Bosphorus to go in quest of that
Palestine which they had vowed to regain, each chief of crusaders would
acknowledge individually the Grecian Emperor, originally lord paramount
of all these regions, as their liege lord and suzerain.

The Emperor Alexius, with trembling joy, beheld the crusaders approach
a conclusion to which he had hoped to bribe them rather by interested
means than by reasoning, although much might be said why provinces
reconquered from the Turks or Saracens should, if recovered from the
infidel, become again a part of the Grecian empire, from which they had
been rent without any pretence, save that of violence.

Though fearful, and almost despairing of being able to manage the rude
and discordant army of haughty chiefs, who were wholly independent of
each other, Alexius failed not, with eagerness and dexterity, to seize
upon the admission of Godfrey and his compeers, that the Emperor was
entitled to the allegiance of all who should war on Palestine, and
natural lord paramount of all the conquests which should be made in the
course of the expedition. He was resolved to make this ceremony so
public, and to interest men's minds in it by such a display of the
imperial pomp and munificence, that it should not either pass unknown,
or be readily forgotten.

An extensive terrace, one of the numerous spaces which extend along the
coast of the Propontis, was chosen for the site of the magnificent
ceremony. Here was placed an elevated and august throne, calculated for
the use of the Emperor alone. On this occasion, by suffering no other
seats within view of the pageant, the Greeks endeavoured to secure a
point of ceremony peculiarly dear to their vanity, namely, that none of
that presence, save the Emperor himself, should be seated. Around the
throne of Alexius Comnenus were placed in order, but standing, the
various dignitaries of his splendid court, in their different ranks,
from the Protosebastos and the Caesar, to the Patriarch, splendid in
his ecclesiastical robes, and to Agelastes, who, in his simple habit,
gave also the necessary attendance. Behind and around the splendid
display of the Emperor's court, were drawn many dark circles of the
exiled Anglo-Saxons. These, by their own desire, were not, on that
memorable day, accoutred in the silver corslets which were the fashion
of an idle court, but sheathed in mail and plate. They desired, they
said, to be known as warriors to warriors. This was the more readily
granted, as there was no knowing what trifle might infringe a truce
between parties so inflammable as were now assembled.

Beyond the Varangians, in much greater numbers, were drawn up the bands
of Grecians, or Romans, then known by the title of Immortals, which had
been borrowed by the Romans originally from the empire of Persia. The
stately forms, lofty crests, and splendid apparel of these guards,
would have given the foreign princes present a higher idea of their
military prowess, had there not occurred in their ranks a frequent
indication of loquacity and of motion, forming a strong contrast to the
steady composure and death-like silence with which the well-trained
Varangians stood in the parade, like statues made of iron.

The reader must then conceive this throne in all the pomp of Oriental
greatness, surrounded by the foreign and Roman troops of the empire,
and closed on the rear by clouds of light-horse, who shifted their
places repeatedly, so as to convey an idea of their multitude, without
affording the exact means of estimating it. Through the dust which they
raised by these evolutions, might be seen banners and standards, among
which could be discovered by glances, the celebrated LABARUM,
[Footnote: Ducange fills half a column of his huge page with the mere
names of the authors who have written at length on the _Labarum_, or
principal standard of the empire for the time of Constantine. It
consisted of a spear of silver, or plated with that metal, having
suspended from, a cross beam below the spoke a small square silken
banner, adorned with portraits of the reigning family, and over these
the famous Monogram which expresses at once the figure of the cross and
the initial letters of the name of Christ. The bearer of the _Labarum_
was an officer of high rank down to the last days of the Byzantine
government.--See Gibbon, chap. 20.

Ducange seems to have proved, from the evidence of coins and triumphial
monuments, that a standard of the form of the _Labarum_ was used by
various barbarous nations long before it was adopted by their Roman
conquerors, and he is of opinion that its name also was borrowed from
either Teutonic Germany, or Celtic Gaul, or Sclavonic Illyria. It is
certain that either the German language or the Welsh may afford at this
day a perfectly satisfactory etymon: _Lap-heer_ in the former and
_Lab-hair_ in the latter, having precisely the same meaning--_the cloth
of the host_.

The form of the _Labarum_ may still be recognised in the banners
carried in ecclesiastical processions in all Roman Catholic countries.]
the pledge of conquest to the imperial banners, but whose sacred
efficacy had somewhat failed of late days. The rude soldiers of the
West, who viewed the Grecian army, maintained that the standards which
were exhibited in front of their line, were at least sufficient for the
array of ten times the number of soldiers.

Far on the right, the appearance of a very large body of European
cavalry drawn up on the sea-shore, intimated the presence of the
crusaders. So great was the desire to follow the example of the chief
Princes, Dukes, and Counts, in making the proposed fealty, that the
number of independent knights and nobles who were to perform this
service, seemed very great when collected together for that purpose;
for every crusader who possessed a tower, and led six lances, would
have thought himself abridged of his dignity if he had not been called
to acknowledge the Grecian Emperor, and hold the lands he should
conquer of his throne, as well as Godfrey of Bouillon, or Hugh the
Great, Count of Vermandois. And yet, with strange inconsistency, though
they pressed to fulfil the homage, as that which was paid by greater
persons than themselves, they seemed, at the very same time, desirous
to find some mode of intimating that the homage which they rendered
they felt as an idle degradation, and in fact held the whole show as a
mere piece of mockery.

The order of the procession had been thus settled:--The Crusaders, or,
as the Grecians called them, the _Counts_,--that being the most common
title among them,--were to advance from the left of their body, and
passing the Emperor one by one, were apprized, that, in passing, each
was to render to him, in as few words as possible, the homage which had
been previously agreed on. Godfrey of Bouillon, his brother Baldwin,
Bohemond of Antioch, and several other crusaders of eminence, were the
first to perform the ceremony, alighting when their own part was
performed, and remaining in attendance by the Emperor's chair, to
prevent, by the awe of their presence, any of their numerous associates
from being guilty of petulance or presumption during the solemnity.
Other crusaders of less degree retained their station near the Emperor,
when they had once gained it, out of mere curiosity, or to show that
they were as much at liberty to do so as the greater commanders who
assumed that privilege.

Thus two great bodies of troops, Grecian and European, paused at some
distance from each other on the banks of the Bosphorus canal, differing
in language, arms, and appearance. The small troops of horse which from
time to time issued forth from these bodies, resembled the flashes of
lightning passing from one thunder-cloud to another, which communicate
to each other by such emissaries their overcharged contents. After some
halt on the margin of the Bosphorus, the Franks who had performed
homage, straggled irregularly forward to a quay on the shore, where
innumerable galleys and smaller vessels, provided for the purpose, lay
with sails and oars prepared to waft the warlike pilgrims across the
passage, and place them on that Asia which they longed so passionately
to visit, and from which but few of them were likely to return. The gay
appearance of the vessels which were to receive them, the readiness
with which they were supplied with refreshments, the narrowness of the
strait they had to cross, the near approach of that active service
which they had vowed and longed to discharge, put the warriors into gay
spirits, and songs and music bore chorus to the departing oars.

While such was the temper of the crusaders, the Grecian Emperor did his
best through the whole ceremonial to impress on the armed multitude the
highest ideas of his own grandeur, and the importance of the occasion
which had brought them together. This was readily admitted by the
higher chiefs; some because their vanity had been propitiated,--some
because their avarice had been gratified,--some because their ambition
had been inflamed,--and a few, a very few, because to remain friends
with Alexius was the most probable means of advancing the purposes of
their expedition. Accordingly the great lords, from these various
motives, practised a humility which perhaps they were far from feeling,
and carefully abstained from all which might seem like irreverence at
the solemn festival of the Grecians. But there were very many of a
different temper.

Of the great number of counts, lords, and knights, under whose variety
of banners the crusaders were led to the walls of Constantinople, many
were too insignificant to be bribed to this distasteful measure of
homage; and these, though they felt it dangerous to oppose resistance,
yet mixed their submission with taunts, ridicule, and such
contraventions of decorum, as plainly intimated that they entertained
resentment and scorn at the step they were about to take, and esteemed
it as proclaiming themselves vassals to a prince, heretic in his faith,
limited in the exercise of his boasted power, their enemy when he dared
to show himself such, and the friend of those only among their number,
who were able to compel him to be so; and who, though to them an
obsequious ally, was to the others, when occasion offered, an insidious
and murderous enemy.

The nobles of Frankish origin and descent were chiefly remarkable for
their presumptuous contempt of every other nation engaged in the
crusade, as well as for their dauntless bravery, and for the scorn with
which they regarded the power and authority of the Greek empire. It was
a common saying among them, that if the skies should fall, the French
crusaders alone were able to hold them up with their lances. The same
bold and arrogant disposition showed itself in occasional quarrels with
their unwilling hosts, in which the Greeks, notwithstanding all their
art, were often worsted; so that Alexius was determined, at all events,
to get rid of these intractable and fiery allies, by ferrying them over
the Bosphorus with all manner of diligence. To do this with safety, he
availed himself of the presence of the Count of Vermandois, Godfrey of
Bouillon, and other chiefs of great influence, to keep in order the
lesser Frankish knights, who were so numerous and unruly. [Footnote:
See Mills, vol. i. chap. 3.]

Struggling with his feelings of offended pride, tempered by a prudent
degree of apprehension, the Emperor endeavoured to receive with
complacence a homage tendered in mockery. An incident shortly took
place of a character highly descriptive of the nations brought together
in so extraordinary a manner, and with such different feelings and
sentiments. Several bands of French had passed, in a sort of
procession, the throne of the Emperor, and rendered, with some
appearance of gravity, the usual homage. On this occasion they bent
their knees to Alexius, placed their hands within his, and in that
posture paid the ceremonies of feudal fealty. But when it came to the
turn of Bohemond of Antioch, already mentioned, to render this fealty,
the Emperor, desirous to show every species of honour to this wily
person, his former enemy, and now apparently his ally, advanced two or
three paces towards the sea-side, where the boats lay as if in
readiness for his use.

The distance to which the Emperor moved was very small, and it was
assumed as a piece of deference to Bohemond; but it became the means of
exposing Alexius himself to a cutting affront, which his guards and
subjects felt deeply, as an intentional humiliation. A half score of
horsemen, attendants of the Frankish Count who was next to perform the
homage, with their lord at their head, set off at full gallop from the
right flank of the French squadrons, and arriving before the throne,
which was yet empty, they at once halted. The rider at the head of the
band was a strong herculean figure, with a decided and stern
countenance, though extremely handsome, looking out from thick black
curls. His head was surmounted with a barret cap, while his hands,
limbs, and feet were covered with garments of chamois leather, over
which he in general wore the ponderous and complete armour of his
country. This, however, he had laid aside for personal convenience,
though in doing so he evinced a total neglect of the ceremonial which
marked so important a meeting. He waited not a moment for the Emperor's
return, nor regarded the impropriety of obliging Alexius to hurry his
steps back to his throne, but sprung from his gigantic horse, and threw
the reins loose, which were instantly seized by one of the attendant
pages. Without a moment's hesitation the Frank seated himself in the
vacant throne of the Emperor, and extending his half-armed and robust
figure on the golden cushions which were destined for Alexius, he
indolently began to caress a large wolf-hound which had followed him,
and which, feeling itself as much at ease as its master, reposed its
grim form on the carpets of silk and gold damask, which tapestried the
imperial foot-stool. The very hound stretched itself with a bold,
ferocious insolence, and seemed to regard no one with respect, save the
stern knight whom it called master.

The Emperor, turning back from the short space which, as a special mark
of favour, he had accompanied Bohemond, beheld with astonishment his
seat occupied by this insolent Frank. The bands of the half-savage
Varangians who were stationed around, would not have hesitated an
instant in avenging the insult, by prostrating the violator of their
master's throne even in this act of his contempt, had they not been
restrained by Achilles Tatius and other officers, who were uncertain
what the Emperor would do, and somewhat timorous of taking a resolution
for themselves.

Meanwhile, the unceremonious knight spoke aloud, in a speech which,
though provincial, might be understood by all to whom the French
language was known, while even those who understood it not, gathered
its interpretation from his tone and manner. "What churl is this," he
said, "who has remained sitting stationary like a block of wood, or the
fragment of a rock, when so many noble knights, the flower of chivalry
and muster of gallantry, stand uncovered around, among the thrice
conquered Varangians?"

A deep, clear accent replied, as if from the bottom of the earth, so
like it was to the accents of some being from the other world,--"If the
Normans desire battle of the Varangians, they will meet them in the
lists man to man, without the poor boast of insulting the Emperor of
Greece, who is well known to fight only by the battle-axes of his
guard."

The astonishment was so great when this answer was heard, as to affect
even the knight, whose insult upon the Emperor had occasioned it; and
amid the efforts of Achilles to retain his soldiers within the bounds
of subordination and silence, a loud murmur seemed to intimate that
they would not long remain so. Bohemond returned through the press with
a celerity which did not so well suit the dignity of Alexius, and
catching the crusader by the arm, he, something between fair means and
a gentle degree of force, obliged him to leave the chair of the
Emperor, in which he had placed himself so boldly.

"How is it," said Bohemond, "noble Count of Paris? Is there one of this
great assembly who can see with patience, that your name, so widely
renowned for valour, is now to be quoted in an idle brawl with
hirelings, whose utmost boast it is to bear a mercenary battle-axe in
the ranks of the Emperor's guards? For shame--for shame--do not, for
the discredit of Norman chivalry, let it be so!"

"I know not," said the crusader, rising reluctantly--"I am not nice in
choosing the degree of my adversary, when he bears himself like one who
is willing and forward in battle. I am good-natured, I tell thee, Count
Bohemond; and Turk or Tartar, or wandering Anglo-Saxon, who only
escapes from the chain of the Normans to become the slave of the Greek,
is equally welcome to whet his blade clean against my armour, if he
desires to achieve such an honourable office."

The Emperor had heard what passed--had heard it with indignation, mixed
with fear; for he imagined the whole scheme of his policy was about to
be overturned at once by a premeditated plan of personal affront, and
probably an assault upon his person. He was about to call to arms,
when, casting his eyes on the right flank of the crusaders, he saw that
all remained quiet after the Frank Baron had transferred himself from
thence. He therefore instantly resolved to let the insult pass, as one
of the rough pleasantries of the Franks, since the advance of more
troops did not give any symptom of an actual onset.

Resolving on his line of conduct with the quickness of thought, he
glided back to his canopy, and stood beside his throne, of which,
however, he chose not instantly to take possession, lest he should give
the insolent stranger some ground for renewing and persisting in a
competition for it.

"What bold Vavasour is this," said he to Count Baldwin, "whom, as is
apparent from his dignity, I ought to have received seated upon my
throne, and who thinks proper thus to vindicate his rank?"

"He is reckoned one of the bravest men in our host," answered Baldwin,
"though the brave are as numerous there as the sands of the sea. He
will himself tell you his name and rank."

Alexius looked at the Vavasour. He saw nothing in his large,
well-formed features, lighted by a wild touch of enthusiasm which spoke
in his quick eye, that intimated premeditated insult, and was induced
to suppose that what had occurred, so contrary to the form and
ceremonial of the Grecian court, was neither an intentional affront,
nor designed as the means of introducing a quarrel. He therefore spoke
with comparative ease, when he addressed the stranger thus:--"We know
not by what dignified name to salute you: but we are aware, from Count
Baldwin's information, that we are honoured in having in our presence
one of the bravest knights whom a sense of the wrongs done to the Holy
Land has brought thus far on his way to Palestine, to free it from its
bondage."

"If you mean to ask my name," answered the European knight, "any one of
these pilgrims can readily satisfy you, and more gracefully than I can
myself; since we use to say in our country, that many a fierce quarrel
is prevented from being fought out by an untimely disclosure of names,
when men, who might have fought with the fear of God before their eyes,
must, when their names are manifested, recognise each other as
spiritual allies, by baptism, gossipred, or some such irresistible bond
of friendship; whereas, had they fought first and told their names
afterwards, they could have had some assurance of each other's valour,
and have been able to view their relationship as an honour to both."

"Still," said the Emperor, "methinks I would know if you, who, in this
extraordinary press of knights, seem to assert a precedence to
yourself, claim the dignity due to a king or prince?"

"How speak you that?" said the Frank, with a brow somewhat
over-clouded; "do you feel that I have not left you unjostled by my
advance to these squadrons of yours?"

Alexius hastened to answer, that he felt no particular desire to
connect the Count with an affront or offence; observing, that in the
extreme necessity of the Empire, it was no time for him, who was at the
helm, to engage in idle or unnecessary quarrels.

The Frankish knight heard him, and answered drily--"Since such are your
sentiments, I wonder that you have ever resided long enough within the
hearing of the French language to learn to speak it as you do. I would
have thought some of the sentiments of the chivalry of the nation,
since you are neither a monk nor a woman, would, at the same time with
the words of the dialect, have found their way into your heart." "Hush,
Sir Count," said Bohemond, who remained by the Emperor to avert the
threatening quarrel. "It is surely requisite to answer the Emperor with
civility; and those who are impatient for warfare, will have infidels
enough to wage it with. He only demanded your name and lineage, which
you of all men can have the least objection to disclose."

"I know not if it will interest this prince, or Emperor as you term
him," answered the Frank Count; "but all the account I can give of
myself is this:--In the midst of one of the vast forests which, occupy
the centre of France, my native country, there stands a chapel, sunk so
low into the ground, that it seems as if it were become decrepid by its
own great age. The image of the Holy Virgin who presides over its
altar, is called by all men our Lady of the Broken Lances, and is
accounted through the whole kingdom the most celebrated for military
adventures. Four beaten roads, each leading from an opposite point in
the compass, meet before the principal door of the chapel; and ever and
anon, as a good knight arrives at this place, he passes in to the
performance of his devotions in the chapel, having first sounded his
horn three times, till ash and oak-tree quiver and ring. Having then
kneeled down to his devotions, he seldom arises from the mass of Her of
the Broken Lances, but there is attending on his leisure some
adventurous knight ready to satisfy the new comer's desire of battle.
This station have I held for a month and more against all comers, and
all gave me fair thanks for the knightly manner of quitting myself
towards them, except one, who had the evil hap to fall from his horse,
and did break his neck; and another, who was struck through the body,
so that the lance came out behind his back about a cloth-yard, all
dripping with blood. Allowing for such accidents, which cannot easily
be avoided, my opponents parted with me with fair acknowledgment of the
grace I had done them."

"I conceive, Sir Knight," said the Emperor, "that a form like yours,
animated by the courage you display, is likely to find few equals even
among your adventurous countrymen; far less among men who are taught
that to cast away their lives in a senseless quarrel among themselves,
is to throw away, like a boy, the gift of Providence."

"You are welcome to your opinion," said the Frank, somewhat
contemptuously; "yet I assure you, if you doubt that our gallant strife
was unmixed with sullenness and anger, and that we hunt not the hart or
the boar with merrier hearts in the evening, than we discharge our task
of chivalry by the morn had arisen, before the portal of the old
chapel, you do us foul injustice."

"With the Turks you will not enjoy this amiable exchange of
courtesies," answered Alexius. "Wherefore I would advise you neither to
stray far into the van nor into the rear, but to abide by the standard
where the best infidels make their efforts, and the best knights are
required to repel them."

"By our Lady of the Broken Lances," said the Crusader, "I would not
that the Turks were more courteous than they are Christian, and am well
pleased that unbeliever and heathen hound are a proper description for
the best of them, as being traitor alike to their God and to the laws
of chivalry; and devoutly do I trust that I shall meet with them in the
front rank of our army, beside our standard, or elsewhere, and have an
open field to my devoir against them, both as the enemies of our Lady
and the holy saints, and as, by their evil customs, more expressly my
own. Meanwhile you have time to seat yourself and receive my homage,
and I will be bound to you for despatching this foolish ceremony with
as little waste and delay of time as the occasion will permit."

The Emperor hastily seated himself, and received into his the sinewy
hands of the Crusader, who made the acknowledgment of his homage, and
was then guided off by Count Baldwin, who walked with the stranger to
the ships, and then, apparently well pleased at seeing him in the
course of going on board, returned back to the side of the Emperor.

"What is the name," said the Emperor, "of that singular and assuming
man?"

"It is Robert, Count of Paris," answered Baldwin, "accounted one of the
bravest peers who stand around the throne of France."

After a moment's recollection, Alexius Comnenus issued orders, that the
ceremonial of the day should be discontinued, afraid, perhaps, lest the
rough and careless humour of the strangers should produce some new
quarrel. The crusaders were led, nothing loth, back to palaces in which
they had been hospitably received, and readily resumed the interrupted
feast, from which they had been called to pay their homage. The
trumpets of the various leaders blew the recall of the few troops of an
ordinary character who were attendant, together with the host of
knights and leaders, who, pleased with the indulgences provided for
them, and obscurely foreseeing that the passage of the Bosphorus would
be the commencement of their actual suffering, rejoiced in being called
to the hither side.

It was not probably intended; but the hero, as he might be styled, of
the tumultuous day, Count Robert of Paris, who was already on his road
to embarkation on the strait, was disturbed in his purpose by the sound
of recall which was echoed around; nor could Bohemond, Godfrey, or any
one who took upon him to explain the signal, alter his resolution of
returning to Constantinople. He laughed to scorn the threatened
displeasure of the Emperor, and seemed to think there would be a
peculiar pleasure in braving Alexius at his own board, or, at least,
that nothing could be more indifferent than whether he gave offence or
not.

To Godfrey of Bouillon, to whom he showed some respect, he was still
far from paying deference; and that sagacious prince, having used every
argument which might shake his purpose of returning to the imperial
city, to the very point of making it a quarrel with him in person, at
length abandoned him to his own discretion, and pointed him out to the
Count of Thoulouse, as he passed, as a wild knight-errant, incapable of
being influenced by any thing save his own wayward fancy. "He brings
not five hundred men to the crusade," said Godfrey; "and I dare be
sworn, that even in this, the very outset of the undertaking, he knows
not where these five hundred men are, and how their wants are provided
for. There is an eternal trumpet in his ear sounding to assault, nor
has he room or time to hear a milder or more rational signal. See how
he strolls along yonder, the very emblem of an idle schoolboy, broke
out of the school-bounds upon a holyday, half animated by curiosity and
half by love of mischief."

"And," said Raymond, Count of Thoulouse, "with resolution sufficient to
support the desperate purpose of the whole army of devoted crusaders.
And yet so passionate a Rodomont is Count Robert, that he would rather
risk the success of the whole expedition, that omit an opportunity of
meeting a worthy antagonist _en champ-clos_, or lose, as he terms it, a
chance of worshipping our Lady of the Broken Lances. Who are yon with
whom he has now met, and who are apparently walking, or rather
strolling in the same way with him, back to Constantinople?"

"An armed knight, brilliantly equipped--yet of something less than
knightly stature," answered Godfrey. "It is, I suppose, the celebrated
lady who won Robert's heart in the lists of battle, by bravery and
valour equal to his own; and the pilgrim form in the long vestments may
be their daughter or niece."

"A singular spectacle, worthy Knight," said the Count of Thoulouse, "do
our days present to us, to which we have had nothing similar, since
Gaita, [Footnote: This Amazon makes a conspicuous figure in Anna
Comnena's account of her father's campaigns against Robert Guiscard. On
one occasion (Alexiad, lib. iv. p. 93) she represents her as thus
recalling the fugitive soldiery of her husband to their duty,--[Greek:
Hae de ge Taita Aeallas allae, kan mae Athaenae kat auton megisaen
apheisa phonaen, monon ou to Homaerikon epos tae idia dialektio legein
eokei. Mechri posou pheuxesthou; ataete aneres ese. Hos de eti
pheugontas toutous eora, dory makron enagkalisamenae, holous rhytaeras
endousa kata ton pheugonton ietai].--That is, exhorting them, in all
but Homeric language, at the top of her voice; and when this failed,
brandishing a long spear, and rushing upon the fugitives at the utmost
speed of her horse.

This heroic lady, according to the _Chronigue Scandaleuse_, of those
days, was afterwards deluded by some cunning overtures of the Greek
Emperor, and poisoned her husband in expectation of gaining a place on
the throne of Constantinople. Ducange, however, rejects the story, and
so does Gibbon.] wife of Robert Guiscard, first took upon her to
distinguish herself by manly deeds of emprise, and rival her husband,
as well in the front of battle as at the dancing-room or banquet."

"Such is the custom of this pair, most noble knight," answered another
Crusader, who had joined them, "and Heaven pity the poor man who has no
power to keep domestic peace by an appeal to the stronger hand!"

"Well!" replied Raymond, "if it be rather a mortifying reflection, that
the lady of our love is far past the bloom of youth, it is a
consolation that she is too old-fashioned to beat us, when we return
back with no more of youth or manhood than a long crusade has left. But
come, follow on the road to Constantinople, and in the rear of this
most doughty knight."




CHAPTER THE TENTH.

     Those were wild times--the antipodes of ours:
     Ladies were there, who oftener saw themselves
     In the broad lustre of a foeman's shield
     Than in a mirror, and who rather sought
     To match themselves in battle, than in dalliance
     To meet a lover's onset.--But though Nature
     Was outraged thus, she was not overcome.
                                FEUDAL TIMES.


Brenhilda, Countess of Paris, was one of those stalwart dames who
willingly hazarded themselves in the front of battle, which, during the
first crusade, was as common as it was possible for a very unnatural
custom to be, and, in fact, gave the real instances of the Marphisas
and Bradamantes, whom the writers of romance delighted to paint,
assigning them sometimes the advantage of invulnerable armour, or a
spear whose thrust did not admit of being resisted, in order to soften
the improbability of the weaker sex being frequently victorious over
the male part of the creation.

But the spell of Brenhilda was of a more simple nature, and rested
chiefly in her great beauty.

From a girl she despised the pursuits of her sex; and they who ventured
to become suitors for the hand of the young Lady of Aspramonte, to
which warlike fief she had succeeded, and which perhaps encouraged her
in her fancy, received for answer, that they must first merit it by
their good behaviour in the lists. The father of Brenhilda was dead;
her mother was of a gentle temper, and easily kept under management by
the young lady herself.

Brenhilda's numerous suitors readily agreed to terms which were too
much according to the manners of the age to be disputed. A tournament
was held at the Castle of Aspramonte, in which one half of the gallant
assembly rolled headlong before their successful rivals, and withdrew
from the lists mortified and disappointed. The successful party among
the suitors were expected to be summoned to joust among themselves. But
they were surprised at being made acquainted with the lady's further
will. She aspired to wear armour herself, to wield a lance, and back a
steed, and prayed the knights that they would permit a lady, whom they
professed to honour so highly, to mingle in their games of chivalry.
The young knights courteously received their young mistress in the
lists, and smiled at the idea of her holding them triumphantly against
so many gallant champions of the other sex. But the vassals and old
servants of the Count, her father, smiled to each other, and intimated
a different result than the gallants anticipated. The knights who
encountered the fair Brenhilda were one by one stretched on the sand;
nor was it to be denied, that the situation of tilting with one of the
handsomest women of the time was an extremely embarrassing one. Each
youth was bent to withhold his charge in full volley, to cause his
steed to swerve at the full shock, or in some other way to flinch from
doing the utmost which was necessary to gain the victory, lest, in so
gaining it, he might cause irreparable injury to the beautiful opponent
he tilted with. But the Lady of Aspramonte was not one who could be
conquered by less than the exertion of the whole strength and talents
of the victor. The defeated suitors departed from the lists the more
mortified at their discomfiture, because Robert of Paris arrived at
sunset, and, understanding what was going forward, sent his name to the
barriers, as that of a knight who would willingly forego the reward of
the tournament, in case he had the fortune to gain it, declaring, that
neither lauds nor ladies' charms were what he came thither to seek.
Brenhilda, piqued and mortified, chose a new lance, mounted her best
steed, and advanced into the lists as one determined to avenge upon the
new assailant's brow the slight of her charms which he seemed to
express. But whether her displeasure had somewhat interfered with her
usual skill, or whether she had, like others of her sex, felt a
partiality towards one whose heart was not particularly set upon
gaining hers--or whether, as is often said on such occasions, her fated
hour was come, so it was that Count Robert tilted with his usual
address and good fortune. Brenhilda of Aspramonte was unhorsed and
unhelmed, and stretched on the earth, and the beautiful face, which
faded from very red to deadly pale before the eyes of the victor,
produced its natural effect in raising the value of his conquest. He
would, in conformity with his resolution, have left the castle after
having mortified the vanity of the lady; but her mother opportunely
interposed; and when she had satisfied herself that no serious injury
had been sustained by the young heiress, she returned her thanks to the
stranger knight who had taught her daughter a lesson, which, she
trusted, she would not easily forget. Thus tempted to do what he
secretly wished, Count Robert gave ear to those sentiments, which
naturally whispered to him to be in no hurry to withdraw.

He was of the blood of Charlemagne, and, what was still of more
consequence in the young lady's eyes, one of the most renowned of
Norman knights in that jousting day. After a residence of ten days in
the castle of Aspramonte, the bride and bridegroom set out, for such
was Count Robert's will, with a competent train, to our Lady of the
Broken Lances, where it pleased him to be wedded. Two knights who were
waiting to do battle, as was the custom of the place, were rather
disappointed at the nature of the cavalcade, which seemed to interrupt
their purpose. But greatly were they surprised when they received a
cartel from the betrothed couple, offering to substitute their own
persons in the room of other antagonists, and congratulating themselves
in commencing their married life in a manner so consistent with that
which they had hitherto led. They were victorious as usual; and the
only persons having occasion to rue the complaisance of the Count and
his bride, were the two strangers, one of whom broke an arm in the
rencontre, and the other dislocated a collar-bone.

Count Robert's course of knight-errantry did not seem to be in the
least intermitted by his marriage; on the contrary, when he was called
upon to support his renown, his wife was often known also in military
exploits, nor was she inferior to him in thirst after fame. They both
assumed the cross at the same time, that being then the predominating
folly in Europe.

The Countess Brenhilda was now above six-and-twenty years old, with as
much beauty as can well fall to the share of an Amazon. A figure, of
the largest feminine size, was surmounted by a noble countenance, to
which even repeated warlike toils had not given more than a sunny hue,
relieved by the dazzling whiteness of such parts of her face as were
not usually displayed.

As Alexius gave orders that his retinue should return to
Constantinople, he spoke in private to the Follower, Achilles Tatius.
The Satrap answered with a submissive bend of the head, and separated
with a few attendants from the main body of the Emperor's train. The
principal road to the city was, of course, filled with the troops, and
with the numerous crowds of spectators, all of whom were inconvenienced
in some degree by the dust and heat of the weather.

Count Robert of Paris had embarked his horses on board of ship, and all
his retinue, except an old squire or valet of his own, and an attendant
of his wife. He felt himself more incommoded in this crowd than he
desired, especially as his wife shared it with him, and began to look
among the scattered trees which fringed the shores, down almost to the
tide-mark, to see if he could discern any by-path which might carry
them more circuitously, but more pleasantly, to the city, and afford
them at the same time, what was their principal object in the East,
strange sights, or adventures of chivalry. A broad and beaten path
seemed to promise them all the enjoyment which shade could give in a
warm climate. The ground through which it wound its way was beautifully
broken by the appearance of temples, churches, and kiosks, and here and
there a fountain distributed its silver produce, like a benevolent
individual, who, self-denying to himself, is liberal to all others who
are in necessity. The distant sound of the martial music still regaled
their way; and, at the same time, as it detained the populace on the
high-road, prevented the strangers from becoming incommoded with
fellow-travellers.

Rejoicing in the abated heat of the day-wondering, at the same time, at
the various kinds of architecture, the strange features of the
landscape, or accidental touches of manners, exhibited by those who met
or passed them upon their journey, they strolled easily onwards. One
figure particularly caught the attention of the Countess Brenhilda.
This was an old man of great stature, engaged, apparently, so deeply
with the roll of parchment which he held in his hand, that he paid no
attention to the objects which were passing around him. Deep thought
appeared to reign on his brow, and his eye was of that piercing kind
which seems designed to search and winnow the frivolous from the
edifying part of human discussion, and limit its inquiry to the last.
Raising his eyes slowly from the parchment on which he had been gazing,
the look of Agelastes--for it was the sage himself--encountered those
of Count Robert and his lady, and addressing them, with the kindly
epithet of "my children," he asked if they had missed their road, or
whether there was any thing in which he could do them any pleasure.

"We are strangers, father," was the answer, "from a distant country,
and belonging to the army which has passed hither upon pilgrimage; one
object brings us here in common, we hope, with all that host. We desire
to pay our devotions where the great ransom was paid for us, and to
free, by our good swords, enslaved Palestine, from the usurpation and
tyranny of the infidel. When we have said this, we have announced our
highest human motive. Yet Robert of Paris and his Countess would not
willingly set their foot on a land, save what should resound its echo.
They have not been accustomed to move in silence upon the face of the
earth, and they would purchase an eternal life of fame, though it were
at the price of mortal existence."

"You seek, then, to barter safety for fame," said Agelastes, "though
you may, perchance, throw death into the scale by which you hope to
gain it?"

"Assuredly," said Count Robert; "nor is there one wearing such a belt
as this, to whom such a thought is stranger."

"And as I understand," said Agelastes, "your lady shares with your
honourable self in these valorous resolutions?--Can this be?"

"You may undervalue my female courage, father, if such is your will,"
said the Countess; "but I speak in presence of a witness who can attest
the truth, when I say that a man of half your years had not doubted the
truth with impunity."

"Nay, Heaven protect me from the lightning of your eyes," said
Agelastes, "whether in anger or in scorn. I bear an aegis about myself
against what I should else have feared. But age, with its incapacities,
brings also its apologies. Perhaps, indeed, it is one like me whom you
seek to find, and in that case I should be happy to render to you such
services as it is my duty to offer to all worthy knights."

"I have already said," replied Count Robert, "that after the
accomplishment of my vow,"--he looked upwards and crossed
himself,--"there is nothing on earth to which I am more bound than to
celebrate my name in arms as becomes a valiant cavalier. When men die
obscurely, they die for ever. Had my ancestor Charles never left the
paltry banks of the Saale, he had not now been much better known than
any vine-dresser who wielded his pruning-hook in the same territories.
But he bore him like a brave man, and his name is deathless in the
memory of the worthy."

"Young man," said the old Grecian, "although it is but seldom that such
as you, whom I was made to serve and to value, visit this country, it
is not the less true that I am well qualified to serve you in the
matter which you have so much at heart. My acquaintance with nature has
been so perfect and so long, that, during its continuance, she has
disappeared, and another world has been spread before me, in which she
has but little to do. Thus the curious stores which I have assembled
are beyond the researches of other men, and not to be laid before those
whose deeds of valour are to be bounded by the ordinary probabilities
of everyday nature. No romancer of your romantic country ever devised
such extraordinary adventures out of his own imagination, and to feed
the idle wonder of those who sat listening around, as those which I
know, not of idle invention, but of real positive existence, with the
means of achieving and accomplishing the conditions of each adventure."

"If such be your real profession," said the French Count, "you have met
one of those whom you chiefly search for; nor will my Countess and I
stir farther upon our road until you have pointed out to us some one of
those adventures which, it is the business of errant-knights to be
industrious in seeking out."

So saying, he sat down by the side of the old man; and his lady, with a
degree of reverence which had something in it almost diverting,
followed his example.

"We have fallen right, Brenhilda," said Count Robert; "our guardian.
angel has watched his charge carefully. Here have we come among an,
ignorant set of pedants, chattering their absurd language, and holding
more important the least look that a cowardly Emperor can give, than
the best blow that a good knight can deal. Believe me, I was wellnigh
thinking that we had done ill to take the cross--God forgive such an
impious doubt! Yet here, when we were even despairing to find the road
to fame, we have met with one of those excellent men whom the knights
of yore were wont to find sitting by springs, by crosses, and by
altars, ready to direct the wandering knight where fame was to be
found. Disturb him not, my Brenhilda," said the Count, "but let him
recall to himself his stories of the ancient time, and thou shalt see
he will enrich us with the treasures of his information."

"If," replied Agelastes, after some pause, "I have waited for a longer
term than human life is granted to most men, I shall still be overpaid
by dedicating what remains of existence to the service of a pair so
devoted to chivalry. What first occurs to me is a story of our Greek
country, so famous in adventures, and which I shall briefly detail to
you:--

"Afar hence, in our renowned Grecian Archipelago, amid storms and
whirlpools, rocks which, changing their character, appear to
precipitate themselves against each other, and billows that are never
in a pacific state, lies the rich island of Zulichium, inhabited,
notwithstanding its wealth, by a very few natives, who live only upon
the sea-coast. The inland part of the island is one immense mountain,
or pile of mountains, amongst which, those who dare approach near
enough, may, we are assured, discern the moss-grown and antiquated
towers and pinnacles of a stately, but ruinous castle, the habitation
of the sovereign of the island, in which she has been, enchanted for a
great many years.

"A bold knight, who came upon, a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, made a vow to
deliver this unhappy victim of pain and sorcery; feeling, with justice,
vehemently offended, that the fiends of darkness should exercise any
authority near the Holy Land, which might be termed the very fountain
of light. Two of the oldest inhabitants of the island undertook to
guide him as near to the main gate as they durst, nor did they approach
it more closely than the length of a bow-shot. Here, then, abandoned to
himself, the brave Frank set forth upon his enterprise, with a stout
heart, and Heaven alone to friend. The fabric which he approached
showed, by its gigantic size, and splendour of outline, the power and
wealth of the potentate who had erected it. The brazen gates unfolded
themselves as if with hope and pleasure; and aerial voices swept around
the spires and turrets, congratulating the genius of the place, it
might be, upon the expected approach of its deliverer.

"The knight passed on, not unmoved with wonder, though untainted by
fear; and the Gothic splendours which he saw were of a kind highly to
exalt his idea of the beauty of the mistress for whom a prison-house
had been so richly decorated. Guards there were in Eastern dress and
arms, upon bulwark and buttress, in readiness, it appeared, to bend
their bows; but the warriors were motionless and silent, and took no
more notice of the armed step of the knight than if a monk or hermit
had approached their guarded post. They were living, and yet, as to all
power and sense, they might be considered among the dead. If there was
truth in the old tradition, the sun had shone and the rain had fallen
upon them for more than four hundred changing seasons, without their
being sensible of the genial warmth of the one or the coldness of the
other. Like the Israelites in the desert, their shoes had not decayed,
nor their vestments waxed old. As Time left them, so and without
alteration was he again to find them." The philosopher began now to
recall what he had heard of the cause of their enchantment.

"The sage to whom this potent charm is imputed, was one of the Magi who
followed the tenets of Zoroaster. He had come to the court of this
youthful Princess, who received him with every attention which
gratified vanity could dictate, so that in a short time her awe of this
grave personage was lost in the sense of ascendency which her beauty
gave her over him. It was no difficult matter--in fact it happens every
day--for the beautiful woman to lull the wise man into what is not
inaptly called a fool's paradise. The sage was induced to attempt feats
of youth which his years rendered ridiculous; he could command the
elements, but the common course of nature was beyond his power. When,
therefore, he exerted his magic strength, the mountains bent and the
seas receded; but when the philosopher attempted to lead forth the
Princess of Zulichium in the youthful dance, youths and maidens turned
their heads aside lest they should make too manifest the ludicrous
ideas with which they were impressed.

"Unhappily, as the aged, even the wisest of them, will forget
themselves, so the young naturally enter into an alliance to spy out,
ridicule, and enjoy their foibles. Many were the glances which the
Princess sent among her retinue, intimating the nature of the amusement
which she received from the attentions of her formidable lover. In
process of time she lost her caution, and a glance was detected,
expressing to the old man the ridicule and contempt in which he had
been all along held by the object of his affections. Earth has no
passion so bitter as love converted to hatred; and while the sage
bitterly regretted what he had done, he did not the less resent the
light-hearted folly of the Princess by whom he had been duped.

"If, however, he was angry, he possessed the art to conceal it. Not a
word, not a look expressed the bitter disappointment which he had
received. A shade of melancholy, or rather gloom, upon his brow, alone
intimated the coming storm. The Princess became somewhat alarmed; she
was besides extremely good-natured, nor had her intentions of leading
the old man into what would render him ridiculous, been so accurately
planned with malice prepense, as they were the effect of accident and
chance. She saw the pain which he suffered, and thought to end it by
going up to him, when about to retire, and kindly wishing him
good-night.

"'You say well, daughter,' said the sage, 'good-night--but who, of the
numbers who hear me, shall say good-morning?'

"The speech drew little attention, although two or three persons to
whom the character of the sage was known, fled from the island that
very night, and by their report made known the circumstances attending
the first infliction of this extraordinary spell on those who remained
within the Castle. A sleep like that of death fell upon them, and was
not removed. Most of the inhabitants left the island; the few who
remained were cautious how they approached the Castle, and watched
until some bold adventurer should bring that happy awakening which the
speech of the sorcerer seemed in some degree to intimate.

"Never seemed there a fairer opportunity for that awakening to take
place than when the proud step of Artavan de Hautlieu was placed upon
those enchanted courts. On the left, lay the palace and donjon-keep;
but the right, more attractive, seemed to invite to the apartment of
the women. At a side door, reclined on a couch, two guards of the
haram, with their naked swords grasped in their hands, and features
fiendishly contorted between sleep and dissolution, seemed to menace
death to any who should venture to approach. This threat deterred not
Artavan de Hautlieu. He approached the entrance, when the doors, like
those of the great entrance to the Castle, made themselves instantly
accessible to him. A guard-room of the same effeminate soldiers
received him, nor could the strictest examination have discovered to
him whether it was sleep or death which arrested the eyes that seemed
to look upon and prohibit his advance. Unheeding the presence of these
ghastly sentinels, Artavan pressed forward into an inner apartment,
where female slaves of the most distinguished beauty were visible in
the attitude of those who had already assumed their dress for the
night. There was much in this scene which might have arrested so young
a pilgrim as Artavan of Hautlieu; but his heart was fixed on achieving
the freedom of the beautiful Princess, nor did he suffer himself to be
withdrawn from that object by any inferior consideration. He passed on,
therefore, to a little ivory door, which, after a moment's pause, as if
in maidenly hesitation, gave way like the rest, and yielded access to
the sleeping apartment of the Princess herself. A soft light,
resembling that of evening, penetrated into a chamber where every thing
seemed contrived to exalt the luxury of slumber. The heaps of cushions,
which formed a stately bed, seemed rather to be touched than impressed
by the form of a nymph of fifteen, the renowned Princess of Zulichium."

"Without interrupting you, good father," said the Countess Brenhilda,
"it seems to me that we can comprehend the picture of a woman asleep
without much dilating upon it, and that such a subject is little
recommended either by our age or by yours."

"Pardon me, noble lady," answered Agelastes, "the most approved part of
my story has ever been this passage, and while I now suppress it in
obedience to your command, bear notice, I pray you, that I sacrifice
the most beautiful part of the tale."

"Brenhilda," added the Count, "I am surprised you think of interrupting
a story which has hitherto proceeded with so much fire; the telling of
a few words more or less will surely have a much greater influence
upon, the sense of the narrative, than such an addition can possibly
possess over our sentiments of action."

"As you will," said his lady, throwing herself carelessly back upon the
seat; "but methinks the worthy father protracts this discourse, till it
becomes of a nature more trifling than interesting."

"Brenhilda," said the Count, "this is the first time I have remarked in
you a woman's weakness."

"I may as well say, Count Robert, that it is the first time," answered
Brenhilda, "that you have shown to me the inconstancy of your sex."

"Gods and goddesses," said the philosopher, "was ever known a quarrel
more absurdly founded! The Countess is jealous of one whom her husband
probably never will see, nor is there any prospect that the Princess of
Zulichium will be hereafter better known, to the modern world, than if
the curtain hung before her tomb."

"Proceed," said Count Robert of Paris; "if Sir Artavan of Hautlieu has
not accomplished the enfranchisement of the Princess of Zulichium, I
make a vow to our Lady of the Broken Lances,"--

"Remember," said his lady interfering, "that you are already under a
vow to free the Sepulchre of God; and to that, methinks, all lighter
engagements might give place."

"Well, lady--well," said Count Robert, but half satisfied with this
interference, "I will not engage myself, you may be assured, on any
adventure which may claim precedence of the enterprise of the Holy
Sepulchre, to which we are all bound."

"Alas!" said Agelastes, "the distance of Zulichium from the speediest
route to the sepulchre is so small that"--

"Worthy father," said the Countess, "we will, if it pleases you, hear
your tale to an end, and then determine what we will do. We Norman
ladies, descendants of the old Germans, claim a voice with our lords in
the council which precedes the battle; nor has our assistance in the
conflict been deemed altogether useless."

The tone in which this was spoken conveyed an awkward innuendo to the
philosopher, who began to foresee that the guidance of the Norman
knight would be more difficult than he had foreseen, while his consort
remained by his side. He took up, therefore, his oratory on somewhat a
lower key than before, and avoided those warm descriptions which had
given such offence to the Countess Brenhilda.

"Sir Artavan de Hautlieu, says the story, considered in what way he
should accost the sleeping damsel, when it occurred to him in what
manner the charm would be most likely to be reversed. I am in your
judgment, fair lady, if he judged wrong in resolving that the method of
his address should be a kiss upon the lips." The colour of Brenhilda
was somewhat heightened, but she did not deem the observation worthy of
notice.

"Never had so innocent an action," continued the philosopher, "an
effect more horrible. The delightful light of a summer evening was
instantly changed into a strange lurid hue, which, infected with
sulphur, seemed to breathe suffocation through the apartment. The rich
hangings, and splendid furniture of the chamber, the very walls
themselves, were changed into huge stones tossed together at random,
like the inside of a wild beast's den, nor was the den without an
inhabitant. The beautiful and innocent lips to which Artavan de
Hautlieu had approached his own, were now changed into the hideous and
bizarre form, and bestial aspect of a fiery dragon. A moment she
hovered upon the wing, and it is said, had Sir Artavan found courage to
repeat his salute three times, he would then have remained master of
all the wealth, and of the disenchanted princess. But the opportunity
was lost, and the dragon, or the creature who seemed such, sailed out
at a side window upon its broad pennons, uttering loud wails of
disappointment."

Here ended the story of Agelastes. "The Princess," he said, "is still
supposed to abide her doom in the Island of Zulichium, and several
knights have undertaken the adventure; but I know not whether it was
the fear of saluting the sleeping maiden, or that of approaching the
dragon into which she was transformed, but so it is, the spell remains
unachieved. I know the way, and if you say the word, you may be
to-morrow on the road to the castle of enchantment."

The Countess heard this proposal with the deepest anxiety, for she knew
that she might, by opposition, determine her husband irrevocably upon
following out the enterprise. She stood therefore with a timid and
bashful look, strange in a person whose bearing was generally so
dauntless, and prudently left it to the uninfluenced mind of Count
Robert to form the resolution which should best please him.

"Brenhilda," he said, taking her hand, "fame and honour are dear to thy
husband as ever they were to knight who buckled a brand upon his side.
Thou hast done, perhaps, I may say, for me, what I might in vain have
looked for from ladies of thy condition; and therefore thou mayst well
expect a casting voice in such points of deliberation.--Why dost thou
wander by the side of a foreign and unhealthy shore, instead of the
banks of the lovely Seine?--Why dost thou wear a dress unusual to thy
sex?--Why dost thou seek death, and think it little in comparison of
shame?--Why? but that the Count of Paris may have a bride worthy of
him.--Dost thou think that this affection is thrown away? No, by the
saints! Thy knight repays it as he best ought, and sacrifices to thee
every thought which thy affection may less than entirely approve."

Poor Brenhilda, confused as she was by the various emotions with which
she was agitated, now in vain endeavoured to maintain the heroic
deportment which her character as an Amazon required from her. She
attempted to assume the proud and lofty look which was properly her
own, but failing in the effort, she threw herself into the Count's
arms, hung round his neck, and wept like a, village maiden, whose true
love is pressed for the wars. Her husband, a little ashamed, while he
was much moved by this burst of affection in one to whose character it
seemed an unusual attribute, was, at the same time, pleased and proud
that he could have awakened an affection so genuine and so gentle in a
soul so high-spirited and so unbending.

"Not thus," he said, "my Brenhilda! I would not have it thus, either
for thine own sake or for mine. Do not let this wise old man suppose
that thy heart is made of the malleable stuff which forms that of other
maidens; and apologize to him, as may well become thee, for having
prevented my undertaking the adventure of Zulichium, which he
recommends."

It was not easy for Brenhilda to recover herself, after having afforded
so notable an instance how nature can vindicate her rights, with
whatever rigour she may have been disciplined and tyrannized over. With
a look of ineffable affection, she disjoined herself from her husband,
still keeping hold of his hand, and turning to the old man with a
countenance in which the half-effaced tears were succeeded by smiles of
pleasure and of modesty, she spoke to Agelastes as she would to a
person whom she respected, and towards whom she had some offence to
atone. "Father," she said, respectfully, "be not angry with me that I
should have been an obstacle to one of the best knights that ever
spurred steed, undertaking the enterprise of thine enchanted Princess;
but the truth is, that in our land, where knighthood and religion agree
in permitting only one lady love, and one lady wife, we do not quite so
willingly see our husbands run into danger--especially of that kind
where lonely ladies are the parties relieved--and--and kisses are the
ransom paid. I have as much confidence in my Robert's fidelity, as a
lady can have in a loving knight, but still"--

"Lovely lady," said Agelastes, who, notwithstanding his highly
artificial character, could not help being moved by the simple and
sincere affection of the handsome young pair, "you have done no evil.
The state of the Princess is no worse than it was, and there cannot be
a doubt that the knight fated to relieve her, will appear at the
destined period." The Countess smiled sadly, and shook her head. "You
do not know," she said, "how powerful is the aid of which I have
unhappily deprived this unfortunate lady, by a jealousy which I now
feel to have been alike paltry and unworthy; and, such is my regret,
that I could find in my heart to retract my opposition to Count
Robert's undertaking this adventure." She looked at her husband with
some anxiety, as one that had made an offer she would not willingly see
accepted, and did not recover her courage until he said, decidedly,
"Brenhilda, that may not be."

"And why, then, may not Brenhilda herself take the adventure,"
continued the Countess, "since she can neither fear the charms of the
Princess nor the terrors of the dragon?"

"Lady," said Agelastes, "the Princess must be awakened by the kiss of
love, and not by that of friendship."

"A sufficient reason," said the Countess, smiling, "why a lady may not
wish her lord to go forth upon an adventure of which the conditions are
so regulated."

"Noble minstrel, or herald, or by whatever name this country calls
you," said Count Robert, "accept a small remuneration for an hour
pleasantly spent, though spent, unhappily, in vain. I should make some
apology for the meanness of my offering, but French knights, you may
have occasion to know, are more full of fame than of wealth."

"Not for that, noble sir," replied Agelastes, "would I refuse your
munificence; a besant from your worthy hand, or that of your
noble-minded lady, were centupled in its value, by the eminence of the
persons from whom it came. I would hang it round my neck by a string of
pearls, and when I came into the presence of knights and of ladies, I
would proclaim that this addition to my achievement of armorial
distinction, was bestowed by the renowned Count Robert of Paris, and
his unequalled lady." The Knight and the Countess looked on each other,
and the lady, taking from her finger a ring of pure gold, prayed the
old man to accept of it, as a mark of her esteem and her husband's.
"With one other condition," said the philosopher, "which I trust you
will not find altogether unsatisfactory. I have, on the way to the city
by the most pleasant road, a small kiosk, or hermitage, where I
sometimes receive my friends, who, I venture to say, are among the most
respectable personages of this empire. Two or three of these will
probably honour my residence today, and partake of the provision it
affords. Could I add to these the company of the noble Count and
Countess of Paris, I should deem my poor habitation honoured for ever."

"How say you, my noble wife?" said the Count. "The company of a
minstrel befits the highest birth, honours the highest rank, and adds
to the greatest achievements; and the invitation does us too much
credit to be rejected."

"It grows somewhat late," said the Countess: "but we came not here to
shun a sinking sun or a darkening sky, and I feel it my duty, as well
as my satisfaction, to place at the command of the good father every
pleasure which it is in my power to offer to him, for having been the
means of your neglecting his advice."

"The path is so short," said Agelastes, "that we had better keep our
present mode of travelling, if the lady should not want the assistance
of horses."

"No horses on my account," said the Lady Brenhilda. "My waiting-woman,
Agatha, has what necessaries I may require; and, for the rest, no
knight ever travelled so little embarrassed with baggage as my husband."

Agelastes, therefore, led the way through the deepening wood, which was
freshened by the cooler breath of evening, and his guests accompanied
him.




CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH.

     Without, a ruin, broken, tangled, cumbrous,
     Within, it was a little paradise,
     Where Taste had made her dwelling. Statuary,
     First-born of human art, moulded her images,
     And bade men. mark and worship.
                                    ANONYMOUS.


The Count of Paris and his lady attended the old man, whose advanced
age, his excellence in the use of the French language, which he spoke
to admiration,--above all, his skill in applying it to poetical and
romantic subjects, which was essential to what was then termed history
and belles lettres,--drew from the noble hearers a degree of applause,
which, as Agelastes had seldom been vain enough to consider as his due,
so, on the part of the Knight of Paris and his lady, had it been but
rarely conferred. They had walked for some time by a path which
sometimes seemed to hide itself among the woods that came down to the
shore of the Propontis, sometimes emerged from concealment, and skirted
the open margin of the strait, while, at every turn, it seemed guided
by the desire to select a choice and contrast of beauty. Variety of
scenes and manners enlivened, from their novelty, the landscape to the
pilgrims. By the sea-shore, nymphs were seen dancing, and shepherds
piping, or beating the tambourine to their steps, as represented in
some groups of ancient statuary. The very faces had a singular
resemblance to the antique. If old, their long robes, their attitudes,
and magnificent heads, presented the ideas which distinguish prophets
and saints; while, on the other hand, the features of the young
recalled the expressive countenances of the heroes of antiquity, and
the charms of those lovely females by whom their deeds were inspired.
But the race of the Greeks was no longer to be seen, even in its native
country, unmixed, or in absolute purity; on the contrary, they saw
groups of persons with features which argued a different descent.

In a retiring bosom of the shore, which was traversed by the path, the
rocks, receding from the beach, rounded off a spacious portion of level
sand, and, in some degree, enclosed it. A party of heathen Scythians
whom they beheld, presented the deformed features of the demons they
were said to worship--flat noses with expanded nostrils, which seemed
to admit the sight to their very brain; faces which extended rather in
breadth than length, with strange unintellectual eyes placed in the
extremity; figures short and dwarfish, yet garnished with legs and arms
of astonishing sinewy strength, disproportioned to their bodies. As the
travellers passed, the savages held a species of tournament, as the
Count termed it. In this they exercised themselves by darting at each
other long reeds, or canes, balanced for the purpose, which, in this
rude sport, they threw with such force, as not unfrequently to strike
each other from their steeds, and otherwise to cause serious damage.
Some of the combatants being, for the time, out of the play, devoured
with greedy looks the beauty of the Countess, and eyed her in such a
manner, that she said to Count Robert,--"I have never known fear, my
husband, nor is it for me to acknowledge it now; but if disgust be an
ingredient of it, these misformed brutes are qualified to inspire it."
"What, ho, Sir Knight!" exclaimed one of the infidels, "your wife, or
your lady love, has committed a fault against the privileges of the
Imperial Scythians, and not small will be the penalty she has incurred.
You may go your way as fast as you will out of this place, which is,
for the present; our hippodrome, or atmeidan, call it which you will,
as you prize the Roman or the Saracen language; but for your wife, if
the sacrament has united you, believe my word, that she parts not so
soon or so easy."

"Scoundrel heathen," said the Christian Knight, "dost thou hold that
language to a Peer of France?"

Agelastes here interposed, and using the sounding language of a Grecian
courtier, reminded the Scythians, (mercenary soldiers, as they seemed,
of the empire,) that all violence against the European pilgrims was, by
the Imperial orders, strictly prohibited under pain of death.

"I know better," said the exulting savage, shaking one or two javelins
with broad steel heads, and wings of the eagle's feather, which last
were dabbled in blood. "Ask the wings of my javelin," he said, "in
whose heart's blood these feathers have been dyed. They shall reply to
you, that if Alexius Comnenus be the friend of the European pilgrims,
it is only while he looks upon them; and we are too exemplary soldiers
to serve our Emperor otherwise than he wishes to be served."

"Peace, Toxartis," said the philosopher, "thou beliest thine Emperor."

"Peace thou!" said Toxartis, "or I will do a deed that misbecomes a
soldier, and rid the world of a prating old man."

So saying, he put forth his hand to take hold of the Countess's veil.
With the readiness which frequent use had given to the warlike lady,
she withdrew herself from the heathen's grasp, and with her trenchant
sword dealt him so sufficient a blow, that Toxartis lay lifeless on the
plain. The Count leapt on the fallen leader's steed, and crying his
war-cry, "Son of Charlemagne, to the rescue!" he rode amid the rout of
heathen cavaliers with a battle-axe, which he found at the saddlebow of
the deceased chieftain, and wielding it with remorseless dexterity, he
soon slew or wounded, or compelled to flight, the objects of his
resentment; nor was there any of them who abode an instant to support
the boast which they had made. "The despicable churls!" said the
Countess to Agelastes; "it irks me that a drop of such coward blood
should stain the hands of a noble knight. They call their exercise a
tournament, although in their whole exertions every blow is aimed
behind the back, and not one has the courage to throw his windlestraw
while he perceives that of another pointed against himself."

"Such is their custom," said Agelastes; "not perhaps so much from
cowardice as from habit, in exercising before his Imperial Majesty. I
have seen that Toxartis literally turn his back upon the mark when he
bent his bow in full career, and when in the act of galloping the
farthest from his object, he pierced it through the very centre with a
broad arrow."

"A force of such soldiers," said Count Robert, who had now rejoined his
friends, "could not, methinks, be very formidable, where there was but
an ounce of genuine courage in the assailants."

"Mean time, let us pass on to my kiosk," said Agelastes, "lest the
fugitives find friends to encourage them in thoughts of revenge."

"Such friends," said Count Robert, "methinks the insolent heathens
ought not to find in any land which calls itself Christian; and if I
survive the conquest of the Holy Sepulchre, I shall make it my first
business to enquire by what right your Emperor retains in his service a
band of Paynim and unmannerly cut-throats, who dare offer injury upon
the highway, which ought to be sacred to the peace of God and the king,
and to noble ladies and inoffensive pilgrims. It is one of a list of
many questions which, my vow accomplished, I will not fail to put to
him; ay, and expecting an answer, as they say, prompt and categorical."

"You shall gain no answer from me though," said Agelastes to himself.
"Your demands, Sir Knight, are over-peremptory, and imposed under too
rigid conditions, to be replied to by those who can evade them." He
changed the conversation, accordingly, with easy dexterity; and they
had not proceeded much farther, before they reached a spot, the natural
beauties of which called forth the admiration of his foreign
companions. A copious brook, gushing out of the woodland, descended to
the sea with no small noise and tumult; and, as if disdaining a quieter
course, which it might have gained by a little circuit to the right, it
took the readiest road to the ocean, plunging over the face of a lofty
and barren precipice which overhung the sea-shore, and from thence led
its little tribute, with as much noise as if it had the stream of a
full river to boast of, to the waters of the Hellespont.

The rock, we have said, was bare, unless in so far as it was clothed
with the foaming waters of the cataract; but the banks on each side
were covered with plane-trees, walnut-trees, cypresses, and other kinds
of large timber proper to the East. The fall of water, always agreeable
in a warm climate, and generally produced by artificial means, was here
natural, and had been chosen, something like the Sibyl's temple at
Tivoli, for the seat of a goddess to whom the invention of Polytheism
had assigned a sovereignty over the department around. The shrine was
small and circular, like many of the lesser temples of the rustic
deities, and enclosed by the wall of an outer court. After its
desecration, it had probably been converted into a luxurious summer
retreat by Agelastes, or some Epicurean philosopher. As the building,
itself of a light, airy, and fantastic character, was dimly seen
through the branches and foliage on the edge of the rock, so the mode
by which it was accessible was not at first apparent amongst the mist
of the cascade. A pathway, a good deal hidden, by vegetation, ascended
by a gentle acclivity, and prolonged by the architect by means of a few
broad and easy marble steps, making part of the original approach,
conducted the passenger to a small, but exquisitely lovely velvet lawn,
in front of the turret or temple we have described, the back part of
which building overhung the cataract.




CHAPTER THE TWELFTH.

     The parties met. The wily, wordy Greek,
     Weighing each word, and canvassing each syllable;
     Evading, arguing, equivocating.
     And the stern Frank came with his two-hand sword,
     Watching to see which way the balance sways,
     That he may throw it in, and turn the scales.
                                        PALESTINE.


At a signal made by Agelastes, the door of this romantic retreat was
opened by Diogenes, the negro slave, to whom our readers have been
already introduced; nor did it escape the wily old man, that the Count
and his lady testified some wonder at his form and lineaments, being
the first African perhaps whom they had ever seen so closely. The
philosopher lost not the opportunity of making an impression on their
minds, by a display of the superiority of his knowledge.

"This poor being," he observed, "is of the race of Ham, the undutiful
son of Noah; for his transgressions against his parent, he was banished
to the sands of Africa, and was condemned to be the father of a race
doomed to be the slaves of the issue of his more dutiful brethren."

The knight and his lady gazed on the wonderful appearance before them,
and did not, it may be believed, think of doubting the information
which was so much of a piece with their prejudices, while their opinion
of their host was greatly augmented by the supposed extent of his
knowledge.

"It gives pleasure to a man of humanity," continued Agelastes, "when,
in old age, or sickness, we must employ the services of others, which
is at other times scarce lawful, to choose his assistants out of a race
of beings, hewers of wood and drawers of water--from their birth
upwards destined to slavery; and to whom, therefore, by employing them
as slaves, we render no injury, but carry into effect, in a slight
degree, the intentions of the Great Being who made us all."

"Are there many of a race," said the Countess, "so singularly unhappy
in their destination? I have hitherto thought the stories of black men
as idle as those which minstrels tell of fairies and ghosts."

"Do not believe so," said the philosopher; "the race is numerous as the
sands of the sea, neither are they altogether unhappy in discharging
the duties which their fate has allotted them. Those who are of worse
character suffer even in this life the penance due to their guilt; they
become the slaves of the cruel and tyrannical, are beaten, starved, and
mutilated. To those whose moral characters are better, better masters
are provided, who share with their slaves, as with their children, food
and raiment, and the other good things which they themselves enjoy. To
some, Heaven allots the favour of kings and of conquerors, and to a
few, but those the chief favourites of the species, hath been assigned
a place in the mansions of philosophy, where, by availing themselves of
the lights which their masters can afford, they gain a prospect into
that world which is the residence of true happiness."

"Methinks I understand you," replied the Countess, "and if so, I ought
rather to envy our sable friend here than to pity him, for having been
allotted in the partition of his kind to the possession of his present
master, from whom, doubtless, he has acquired the desirable knowledge
which you mention."

"He learns, at least," said Agelastes, modestly, "what I can teach,
and, above all, to be contented with his situation.--Diogenes, my good
child," said he, changing his address to the slave, "thou seest I have
company--What does the poor hermit's larder afford, with which he may
regale his honoured guests?"

Hitherto they had advanced no farther than a sort of outer room, or
hall of entrance, fitted up with no more expense than might have suited
one who desired at some outlay, and more taste, to avail himself of the
ancient building for a sequestered and private retirement. The chairs
and couches were covered with Eastern wove mats, and were of the
simplest and most primitive form. But on touching a spring, an interior
apartment was displayed, which had considerable pretension to splendour
and magnificence. The furniture and hangings of this apartment were of
straw-coloured silk, wrought on the looms of Persia, and crossed with
embroidery, which produced a rich, yet simple effect. The ceiling was
carved in Arabesque, and the four corners of the apartment were formed
into recesses for statuary, which had been produced in a better age of
the art than that which existed at the period of our story. In one
nook, a shepherd seemed to withdraw himself, as if ashamed to produce
his scantily-covered person, while he was willing to afford the
audience the music of the reed which he held in his hand. Three
damsels, resembling the Graces in the beautiful proportions of their
limbs, and the slender clothing which they wore, lurked in different
attitudes, each in her own niche, and seemed but to await the first
sound of the music, to bound forth from thence and join in the frolic
dance. The subject was beautiful, yet somewhat light, to ornament the
study of such a sage as Agelastes represented himself to be.

He seemed to be sensible that this might attract observation.--"These
figures," he said, "executed at the period of the highest excellence of
Grecian art, were considered of old as the choral nymphs assembled to
adore the goddess of the place, waiting but the music to join in the
worship of the temple. And, in truth, the wisest may be interested in
seeing how near to animation the genius of these wonderful men could
bring the inflexible marble. Allow but for the absence of the divine
afflatus, or breath of animation, and an unenlightened heathen might
suppose the miracle of Prometheus was about to be realized. But we,"
said he, looking upwards, "are taught to form a better judgment between
what man can do and the productions of the Deity."

Some subjects of natural history were painted on the walls, and the
philosopher fixed the attention of his guests upon the half-reasoning
elephant, of which he mentioned several anecdotes, which they listened
to with great eagerness.

A distant strain was here heard, as if of music in the woods,
penetrating by fits through the hoarse roar of the cascade, which, as
it sunk immediately below the windows, filled the apartment with its
deep voice.

"Apparently," said Agelastes, "the friends whom I expected are
approaching, and bring with them the means of enchanting another sense.
It is well they do so, since wisdom tells us that we best honour the
Deity by enjoying the gifts he has provided us."

These words called the attention of the philosopher's Frankish guests
to the preparations exhibited in this tasteful saloon. These were made
for an entertainment in the manner of the ancient Romans, and couches,
which were laid beside a table ready decked, announced that the male
guests, at least, were to assist at the banquet in the usual recumbent
posture of the ancients; while seats, placed among the couches, seemed
to say that females were expected, who would observe the Grecian
customs, in eating seated. The preparations for good cheer were such
as, though limited in extent, could scarce be excelled in quality,
either by the splendid dishes which decked Trimalchio's banquet of
former days, or the lighter delicacies of Grecian cookery, or the
succulent and highly-spiced messes indulged in by the nations of the
East, to whichever they happened to give the preference; and it was
with an air of some vanity that Agelastes asked his guests to share a
poor pilgrim's meal.

"We care little for dainties," said the Count; "nor does our present
course of life as pilgrims, bound by a vow, allow us much choice on
such subjects. Whatever is food for soldiers, suffices the Countess and
myself; for, with our will, we would at every hour be ready for battle,
and the less time we use in preparing for the field, it is even so much
the better. Sit then, Brenhilda, since the good man will have it so,
and let us lose no time in refreshment, lest we waste that which should
be otherwise employed." "A moment's forgiveness," said Agelastes,
"until the arrival of my other friends, whose music you may now hear is
close at hand, and who will not long, I may safely promise, divide you
from your meal."

"For that," said the Count, "there is no haste; and since you seem to
account it a part of civil manners, Brenhilda and I can with ease
postpone our repast, unless you will permit us, what I own would be
more pleasing, to take a morsel of bread and a cup of water presently;
and, thus refreshed, to leave the space clear for your more curious and
more familiar guests."

"The saints above forbid!" said Agelastes; "guests so honoured never
before pressed these cushions, nor could do so, if the sacred family of
the imperial Alexius himself even now stood at the gate."

He had hardly uttered these words, when the full-blown peal of a
trumpet, louder in a tenfold degree than the strains of music they had
before heard, was now sounded in the front of the temple, piercing
through the murmur of the waterfall, as a Damascus blade penetrates the
armour, and assailing the ears of the hearers, as the sword pierces the
flesh of him who wears the harness.

"You seem surprised or alarmed, father," said Count Robert. "Is there
danger near, and do you distrust our protection?"

"No," said Agelastes, "that would give me confidence in any extremity;
but these sounds excite awe, not fear. They tell me that some of the
Imperial family are about to be my guests. Yet fear nothing, my noble
friends--they, whose look is life, are ready to shower their favours
with profusion upon strangers so worthy of honour as they will see
here. Meantime, my brow must touch my threshold, in order duly to
welcome them." So saying, he hurried to the outer door of the building.

"Each land has its customs," said the Count, as he followed his host,
with his wife hanging on his arm; "but, Brenhilda, as they are so
various, it is little wonder that they appear unseemly to each other.
Here, however, in deference to my entertainer, I stoop my crest, in the
manner which seems to be required." So saying, he followed Agelastes
into the anteroom, where a new scene awaited them.




CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH.


Agelastes gained his threshold before Count Robert of Paris and his
lady. He had, therefore, time to make his prostrations before a huge
animal, then unknown to the western world, but now universally
distinguished as the elephant. On its back was a pavilion or palanquin,
within which were enclosed the august persons of the Empress Irene, and
her daughter Anna Comnena. Nicephorus Briennius attended the Princesses
in the command of a gallant body of light horse, whose splendid armour
would have given more pleasure to the crusader, if it had possessed
less an air of useless wealth and effeminate magnificence. But the
effect which it produced in its appearance was as brilliant as could
well be conceived. The officers alone of this _corps de garde_ followed
Nicephorus to the platform, prostrated themselves while the ladies of
the Imperial house descended, and rose up again under a cloud of waving
plumes and flashing lances, when they stood secure upon the platform in
front of the building. Here the somewhat aged, but commanding form of
the Empress, and the still juvenile beauties of the fair historian,
were seen to great advantage. In the front of a deep back-ground of
spears and waving crests, stood the sounder of the sacred trumpet,
conspicuous by his size and the richness of his apparel; he kept his
post on a rock above the stone staircase, and, by an occasional note of
his instrument, intimated to the squadrons beneath that they should
stay their progress, and attend the motions of the Empress and the wife
of the Caesar.

The fair form of the Countess Brenhilda, and the fantastic appearance
of her half masculine garb, attracted the attention of the ladies of
Alexius' family, but was too extraordinary to command their admiration.
Agelastes became sensible there was a necessity that he should
introduce his guests to each other, if he desired they should meet on
satisfactory terms. "May I speak," he said, "and live? The armed
strangers whom you find now with me are worthy companions of those
myriads, whom zeal for the suffering inhabitants of Palestine has
brought from the western extremity of Europe, at once to enjoy the
countenance of Alexius Comnenus, and to aid him, since it pleases him
to accept their assistance, in expelling the Paynims from the bounds of
the sacred empire, and garrison those regions in their stead, as
vassals of his Imperial Majesty."

"We are pleased," said the Empress, "worthy Agelastes, that you should
be kind to those who are disposed to be so reverent to the Emperor. And
We are rather disposed to talk with them ourselves, that our daughter
(whom Apollo hath gifted with the choice talent of recording what she
sees) may become acquainted with one of those female warriors of the
West, of whom we have heard so much by common fame, and yet know so
little with certainty."

"Madam," said the Count, "I can but rudely express to you what I have
to find fault with in the explanation which this old man hath given of
our purpose in coming hither. Certain it is, we neither owe Alexius
fealty, nor had we the purpose of paying him any, when we took the vow
upon ourselves which brought us against Asia. We came, because we
understood that the Holy Land had been torn from the Greek Emperor by
the Pagans, Saracens, Turks, and other infidels, from whom we are come
to win it back. The wisest and most prudent among us have judged it
necessary to acknowledge the Emperor's authority, since there was no
such safe way of passing to the discharge of our vow, as that of
acknowledging fealty to him, as the best mode of preventing quarrels
among Christian States. We, though independent of any earthly king, do
not pretend to be greater men than they, and therefore have
condescended to pay the same homage."

The Empress coloured several times with indignation in the course of
this speech, which, in more passages than one, was at variance with
those imperial maxims of the Grecian court, which held its dignity so
high, and plainly intimated a tone of opinion which was depreciating to
the Emperor's power. But the Empress Irene had received instructions
from her imperial spouse to beware how she gave, or even took, any
ground of quarrel with the crusaders, who, though coming in the
appearance of subjects, were, nevertheless, too punctilious and ready
to take fire, to render them safe discussers of delicate differences.
She made a graceful reverence accordingly, as if she had scarce
understood what the Count of Paris had explained so bluntly.

At this moment the appearance of the principal persons on either hand
attracted, in a wonderful degree, the attention of the other party, and
there seemed to exist among them a general desire of further
acquaintance, and, at the same time, a manifest difficulty in
expressing such a wish.

Agelastes--to begin with the master of the house--had risen from the
ground indeed, but without venturing to assume an upright posture; he
remained before the Imperial ladies with his body and head still bent,
his hand interposed between his eyes and their faces, like a man that
would shade his eyesight from the level sun, and awaited in silence the
commands of those to whom he seemed to think it disrespectful to
propose the slightest action, save by testifying in general, that his
house and his slaves were at their unlimited command. The Countess of
Paris, on the other hand, and her warlike husband, were the peculiar
objects of curiosity to Irene, and her accomplished daughter, Anna
Comnena; and it occurred to both these Imperial ladies, that they had
never seen finer specimens of human strength and beauty; but by a
natural instinct, they preferred the manly bearing of the husband to
that of the wife, which seemed to her own sex rather too haughty and
too masculine to be altogether pleasing.

Count Robert and his lady had also their own object of attention in the
newly arrived group, and, to speak truth, it was nothing else than the
peculiarities of the monstrous animal which they now saw, for the first
time, employed as a beast of burden in the service of the fair Irene
and her daughter. The dignity and splendour of the elder Princess, the
grace and vivacity of the younger, were alike lost in Brenhilda's
earnest inquiries into the history of the elephant, and the use which
it made of its trunk, tusks, and huge ears, upon different occasions.

Another person, who took a less direct opportunity to gaze on Brenhilda
with a deep degree of interest, was the Caesar, Nicephorus. This Prince
kept his eye as steadily upon the Frankish Countess as he could well
do, without attracting the attention, and exciting perhaps the
suspicions, of his wife and mother-in-law; he therefore endeavoured to
restore speech to an interview which would have been awkward without
it. "It is possible," he said, "beautiful Countess, that this being
your first visit to the Queen, of the world, you have never hitherto
seen the singularly curious animal called the elephant."

"Pardon me," said the Countess, "I have been treated by this learned
gentleman to a sight, and some account of that wonderful creature."

By all who heard this observation, the Lady Brenhilda was supposed to
have made a satirical thrust at the philosopher himself, who, in the
imperial court, usually went by the name of the elephant.

"No one could describe the beast more accurately than Agelastes," said
the Princess, with a smile of intelligence, which went round her
attendants.

"He knows its docility, its sensibility, and its fidelity," said the
philosopher, in a subdued tone.

"True, good Agelastes," said the Princess; "we should not criticise the
animal which kneels to take us up.--Come, lady of a foreign land," she
continued, turning to the Frank Count, and especially his
Countess--"and you her gallant lord! When you return to your native
country, you shall say you have seen the imperial family partake of
their food, and in so far acknowledge themselves to be of the same clay
with other mortals, sharing their poorest wants, and relieving them in
the same manner."

"That, gentle lady, I can well believe," said Count Robert; "my
curiosity would be more indulged by seeing this strange animal at his
food."

"You will see the elephant more conveniently at his mess within doors,"
answered the Princess, looking at Agelastes.

"Lady," said Brenhilda, "I would not willingly refuse an invitation
given in courtesy, but the sun has waxed low unnoticed, and we must
return to the city."

"Be not afraid," said the fair historian; "you shall have the advantage
of our Imperial escort to protect you in your return."

"Fear?---afraid?--escort?--protect?--These are words I know not. Know,
lady, that my husband, the noble Count of Paris, is my sufficient
escort; and even were he not with me, Brenhilda de Aspramonte fears
nothing, and can defend herself."

"Fair daughter," said Agelastes, "if I may be permitted to speak, you
mistake the gracious intentions of the Princess, who expresses herself
as to a lady of her own land. What she desires is to learn from you
some of the most marked habits and manners of the Franks, of which you
are so beautiful an example; and in return for such information the
illustrious Princess would be glad to procure your entrance to those
spacious collections, where animals from all corners of the habitable
world have been assembled at the command of our Emperor Alexius, as if
to satisfy the wisdom of those sages to whom all creation is known,
from the deer so small in size that it is exceeded by an ordinary rat,
to that huge and singular inhabitant of Africa that can browse on the
tops of trees that are forty feet high, while the length of its
hind-legs does not exceed the half of that wondrous height."

"It is enough," said the Countess, with some eagerness; but Agelastes
had got a point of discussion after his own mind.

"There is also," he said, "that huge lizard, which, resembling in shape
the harmless inhabitant of the moors of other countries, is in Egypt a
monster thirty feet in length, clothed in impenetrable scales, and
moaning over his prey when he catches it, with the hope and purpose of
drawing others within his danger, by mimicking the lamentations of
humanity."

"Say no more, father!" exclaimed the lady. "My Robert, we will go--will
we not, where such objects are to be seen?"

"There is also," said Agelastes, who saw that he would gain his point
by addressing himself to the curiosity of the strangers, "the huge
animal, wearing on its back an invulnerable vestment, having on its
nose a horn, and sometimes two, the folds of whose hide are of the most
immense thickness, and which never knight was able to wound."

"We will go, Robert--will we not?" reiterated the Countess.

"Ay," replied the Count, "and teach, these Easterns how to judge of a
knight's sword, by a single blow of my trusty Tranchefer."

"And who knows," said Brenhilda, "since this is a land of enchantment,
but what some person, who is languishing in a foreign shape, may have
their enchantment unexpectedly dissolved by a stroke of the good
weapon?"

"Say no more, father!" exclaimed the Count. "We will attend this
Princess, since such she is, were her whole escort bent to oppose our
passage, instead of being by her command to be our guard. For know, all
who hear me, thus much of the nature of the Franks, that when you tell
us of danger and difficulties, you give us the same desire to travel
the road where they lie, as other men have in seeking either pleasure
or profit in the paths in which such are to be found."

As the Count pronounced these words, he struck his hand upon his
Tranchefer, as an illustration of the manner in which he purposed upon
occasion to make good his way. The courtly circle startled somewhat at
the clash of steel, and the fiery look of the chivalrous Count Robert.
The Empress indulged her alarm by retreating into the inner apartment
of the pavilion.

With a grace, which was rarely deigned to any but those in close
alliance with the Imperial family, Anna Comnena took the arm of the
noble Count. "I see," she said, "that the Imperial Mother has honoured
the house of the learned Agelastes, by leading the way; therefore, to
teach you Grecian breeding must fall to my share." Saying this she
conducted him to the inner apartment.

"Fear not for your wife," she said, as she noticed the Frank look
round; "our husband, like ourselves, has pleasure in showing attention
to the stranger, and will lead the Countess to our board. It is not the
custom of the Imperial family to eat in company with strangers; but we
thank Heaven for having instructed us in that civility, which can know
no degradation in dispensing with ordinary rules to do honour to
strangers of such merit as yours. I know it will be my mother's
request, that you will take your places without ceremony; and also,
although the grace be somewhat particular, I am sure that it will have
my Imperial father's approbation.

"Be it as your ladyship lists," said Count Robert. "There are few men
to whom I would yield place at the board, if they had not gone before
me in the battle-field. To a lady, especially so fair a one, I
willingly yield my place, and bend my knee, whenever I have the good
hap to meet her."

The Princess Anna, instead of feeling herself awkward in the discharge
of the extraordinary, and, as she might have thought it, degrading
office of ushering a barbarian chief to the banquet, felt, on the
contrary, flattered, at having bent to her purpose a heart so obstinate
as that of Count Robert, and elated, perhaps, with a certain degree of
satisfied pride while under his momentary protection.

The Empress Irene had already seated herself at the head of the table.
She looked with some astonishment, when her daughter and son-in-law,
taking their seats at her right and left hand, invited the Count and
Countess of Paris, the former to recline, the latter to sit at the
board, in the places next to themselves; but she had received the
strictest orders from her husband to be deferential in every respect to
the strangers, and did not think it right, therefore, to interpose any
ceremonious scruples.

The Countess took her seat, as indicated, beside the Caesar; and the
Count, instead of reclining in the mode of the Grecian men, also seated
himself in the European fashion by the Princess.

"I will not lie prostrate," said he, laughing, "except in consideration
of a blow weighty enough to compel me to do so; nor then either, if I
am able to start up and return it."

The service of the table then began, and, to say truth, it appeared to
be an important part of the business of the day. The officers who
attended to perform their several duties of deckers of the table,
sewers of the banquet, removers and tasters to the Imperial family,
thronged into the banqueting room, and seemed to vie with each other in
calling upon Agelastes for spices, condiments, sauces, and wines of
various kinds, the variety and multiplicity of their demands being
apparently devised _ex preposito_, for stirring the patience of the
philosopher. But Agelastes, who had anticipated most of their requests,
however unusual, supplied them completely, or in the greatest part, by
the ready agency of his active slave Diogenes, to whom, at the same
time, he contrived to transfer all blame for the absence of such
articles as he was unable to provide.

"Be Homer my witness, the accomplished Virgil, and the curious felicity
of Horace, that, trifling and unworthy as this banquet was, my note of
directions to this thrice unhappy slave gave the instructions to
procure every ingredient necessary to convey to each dish its proper
gusto.--Ill-omened carrion that thou art, wherefore placedst thou the
pickled cucumber so far apart from the boar's head? and why are these
superb congers unprovided with a requisite quantity of fennel? The
divorce betwixt the shell-fish and the Chian wine, in a presence like
this, is worthy of the divorce of thine own soul from thy body; or, to
say the least, of a lifelong residence in the Pistrinum." While thus
the philosopher proceeded with threats, curses, and menaces against his
slave, the stranger might have an opportunity of comparing the little
torrent of his domestic eloquence, which the manners of the times did
not consider as ill-bred, with the louder and deeper share of adulation
towards his guests. They mingled like the oil with the vinegar and
pickles which Diogenes mixed for the sauce. Thus the Count and Countess
had an opportunity to estimate the happiness and the felicity reserved
for those slaves, whom the Omnipotent Jupiter, in the plenitude of
compassion for their state, and in guerdon of their good morals, had
dedicated to the service of a philosopher. The share they themselves
took in the banquet, was finished with a degree of speed which gave
surprise not only to their host, but also to the Imperial guests.

The Count helped himself carelessly out of a dish which stood near him,
and partaking of a draught of wine, without enquiring whether it was of
the vintage which the Greeks held it matter of conscience to mingle
with that species of food, he declared himself satisfied; nor could the
obliging entreaties of his neighbour, Anna Comnena, induce him to
partake of other messes represented as being either delicacies or
curiosities. His spouse ate still more moderately of the food which
seemed most simply cooked, and stood nearest her at the board, and
partook of a cup of crystal water, which she slightly tinged with wine,
at the persevering entreaty of the Caesar. They then relinquished the
farther business of the banquet, and leaning back upon their seats,
occupied themselves in watching the liberal credit done to the feast by
the rest of the guests present.

A modern synod of gourmands would hardly have equalled the Imperial
family of Greece seated, at a philosophical banquet, whether in the
critical knowledge displayed of the science of eating in all its
branches, or in the practical cost and patience with which they
exercised it. The ladies, indeed, did not eat much of any one dish, but
they tasted of almost all that were presented to them, and their name
was Legion. Yet, after a short time, in Homeric phrase, the rage of
thirst and hunger was assuaged, or, more probably, the Princess Anna
Comnena was tired of being an object of some inattention to the guest
who sat next her, and who, joining his high military character to his
very handsome presence, was a person by whom few ladies would willingly
be neglected. There is no new guise, says our father Chaucer, but what
resembles an old one; and the address of Anna Comnena to the Frankish
Count might resemble that of a modern lady of fashion, in her attempts
to engage in conversation the _exquisite_, who sits by her side in an
apparently absent fit. "We have piped unto you," said the Princess,
"and you have not danced! We have sung to you the jovial chorus of
_Evoe, evoe,_ and you will neither worship Comus nor Bacchus! Are we
then to judge you a follower of the Muses, in whose service, as well as
in that of Phoebus, we ourselves pretend to be enlisted?"

"Fair lady," replied the Frank, "be not offended at my stating once for
all, in plain terms, that I am a Christian man, spitting at, and
bidding defiance to Apollo, Bacchus, Comus, and all other heathen
deities whatsoever."

"O! cruel interpretation of my unwary words!" said the Princess; "I did
but mention the gods of music, poetry, and eloquence, worshipped by our
divine philosophers, and whose names are still used to distinguish the
arts and sciences over which they presided--and the Count interprets it
seriously into a breach of the second commandment! Our Lady preserve
me, we must take care how we speak, when our words are so sharply
interpreted."

The Count laughed as the Princess spoke. "I had no offensive meaning,
madam," he said, "nor would I wish to interpret your words otherwise
than as being most innocent and praiseworthy. I shall suppose that your
speech contained all that was fair and blameless. You are, I have
understood, one of those who, like our worthy host, express in
composition the history and feats of the warlike time in which you
live, and give to the posterity which shall succeed us, the knowledge
of the brave deeds which have been achieved in our day. I respect the
task to which you have dedicated yourself, and know not how a lady
could lay after ages under an obligation to her in the same degree,
unless, like my wife, Brenhilda, she were herself to be the actress of
deeds which she recorded. And, by the way, she now looks towards her
neighbour at the table, as if she were about to rise and leave him; her
inclinations are towards Constantinople, and, with your ladyship's
permission, I cannot allow her to go thither alone."

"That you shall neither of you do," said Anna Comnena; "since we all go
to the capital directly, and for the purpose of seeing those wonders of
nature, of which numerous examples have been collected by the splendour
of my Imperial father.--If my husband seems to have given offence to
the Countess, do not suppose that it was intentionally dealt to her; on
the contrary, you will find the good man, when you are better
acquainted with him, to be one of those simple persons who manage so
unhappily what they mean for civilties, that those to whom they are
addressed receive them frequently in another sense."

The Countess of Paris, however, refused again to sit down to the table
from which she had risen, so that Agelastes and his Imperial guests saw
themselves under the necessity either to permit the strangers to
depart, which they seemed unwilling to do, or to detain them by force,
to attempt which might not perhaps have been either safe or pleasant;
or, lastly, to have waived the etiquette of rank and set out along with
them, at the same time managing their dignity, so as to take the
initiatory step, though the departure took place upon the motion of
their wilful guests. Much tumult there was--bustling, disputing, and
shouting--among the troops and officers who were thus moved from their
repast, two hours at least sooner than had been experienced upon
similar occasions in the memory of the oldest among them. A different
arrangement of the Imperial party likewise seemed to take place by
mutual consent.

Nicephorus Briennius ascended the seat upon the elephant, and remained
there placed beside his august mother-in-law. Agelastes, on a
sober-minded palfrey, which permitted him to prolong his philosophical
harangues at his own pleasure, rode beside the Countess Brenhilda, whom
he made the principal object of his oratory. The fair historian, though
she usually travelled in a litter, preferred upon this occasion a
spirited horse, which enabled her to keep pace with Count Robert of
Paris, on whose imagination, if not his feelings, she seemed to have it
in view to work a marked impression. The conversation of the Empress
with her son-in-law requires no special detail. It was a tissue of
criticisms upon the manners and behaviour of the Franks, and a hearty
wish that they might be soon transported from the realms of Greece,
never more to return. Such was at least the tone of the Empress, nor
did the Caesar find it convenient to express any more tolerant opinion
of the strangers. On the other hand, Agelastes made a long circuit ere
he ventured to approach the subject which he wished to introduce. He
spoke of the menagerie of the Emperor as a most superb collection of
natural history; he extolled different persons at court for having
encouraged Alexius Comnenus in this wise and philosophical amusement.
But, finally, the praise of all others was abandoned that the
philosopher might dwell upon that of Nicephorus Briennius, to whom the
cabinet or collection of Constantinople was indebted, he said, for the
principal treasures it contained.

"I am glad it is so," said the haughty Countess, without lowering her
voice or affecting any change of manner; "I am glad that he understands
some things better worth understanding than whispering with stranger
young women. Credit me, if he gives much license to his tongue among
such women of nay country as these stirring times may bring hither,
some one or other of them will fling him into the cataract which dashes
below."

"Pardon me, fair lady," said Agelastes; "no female heart could meditate
an action so atrocious against so fine a form as that of the Caesar
Nicephorus Briennius."

"Put it not on that issue, father," said the offended Countess; "for,
by my patroness Saint, our Lady of the Broken Lances, had it not been
for regard to these two ladies, who seemed to intend some respect to my
husband and myself, that same Nicephorus should have been as perfectly
a Lord of the Broken Bones as any Caesar who has borne the title since
the great Julius!"

The philosopher, upon this explicit information, began to entertain
some personal fear for himself, and hastened, by diverting the
conversation, which he did with great dexterity, to the story of Hero
and Leander, to put the affront received out of the head of this
unscrupulous Amazon.

Meantime, Count Robert of Paris was engrossed, as it may be termed, by
the fair Anna Comnena. She spoke on all subjects, on some better,
doubtless, others worse, but on none did she suspect herself of any
deficiency; while the good Count wished heartily within himself that
his companion had been safely in bed with the enchanted Princess of
Zulichium. She performed, right or wrong, the part of a panegyrist of
the Normans, until at length the Count, tired of hearing her prate of
she knew not exactly what, broke in as follows:--

"Lady," he said, "notwithstanding I and my followers are sometimes so
named, yet we are not Normans, who come hither as a numerous and
separate body of pilgrims, under the command of their Duke Robert, a
valiant, though extravagant, thoughtless, and weak man. I say nothing
against the fame of these Normans. They conquered, in our fathers'
days, a kingdom far stronger than their own, which men call England; I
see that you entertain some of the natives of which country in your
pay, under the name of Varangians. Although defeated, as I said, by the
Normans, they are, nevertheless, a brave race; nor would we think
ourselves much dishonoured by mixing in battle with them. Still we are
the valiant Franks, who had their dwelling on the eastern banks of the
Rhine and of the Saale, who were converted to the Christian faith by
the celebrated Clovis, and are sufficient, by our numbers and courage,
to re-conquer the Holy Land, should all Europe besides stand neutral in
the contest."

There are few things more painful to the vanity of a person like the
Princess, than the being detected in an egregious error, at the moment
she is taking credit to herself for being peculiarly accurately
informed.

"A false slave, who knew not what he was saying, I suppose," said the
Princess, "imposed upon me the belief that the Varangians were the
natural enemies of the Normans. I see him marching there by the side of
Achilles Tatius, the leader of his corps.--Call him hither, you
officers!--Yonder tall man, I mean, with the battle-axe upon his
shoulder."

Hereward, distinguished by his post at the head of the squadron, was
summoned from thence to the presence of the Princess, where he made his
military obeisance with a cast of sternness in his aspect, as his
glance lighted upon the proud look of the Frenchman who rode beside
Anna Comnena.

"Did I not understand thee, fellow," said Anna Comnena, "to have
informed me, nearly a month ago, that the Normans and the Franks were
the same people, and enemies to the race from which you spring?"

"The Normans are our mortal enemies, Lady," answered Hereward, "by whom
we were driven from our native land. The Franks are subjects of the
same Lord-Paramount with the Normans, and therefore they neither love
the Varangians, nor are beloved by them."

"Good fellow," said the French Count, "you do the Franks wrong, and
ascribe to the Varangians, although not unnaturally, an undue degree of
importance, when you suppose that a race which has ceased to exist as
an independent nation for more than a generation, can be either an
object of interest or resentment to such as we are."

"I am no stranger," said the Varangian, "to the pride of your heart, or
the precedence which you assume over those who have been less fortunate
in war than yourselves. It is God who casteth down and who buildeth up,
nor is there in the world a prospect to which the Varangians would look
forward with more pleasure than that a hundred of their number should
meet in a fair field, either with the oppressive Normans, or their
modern compatriots, the vain Frenchmen, and let God be the judge which
is most worthy of victory."

"You take an insolent advantage of the chance," said the Count of
Paris, "which gives you an unlooked-for opportunity to brave a
nobleman."

"It is my sorrow and shame," said the Varangian, "that that opportunity
is not complete; and that there is a chain around me which forbids me
to say, Slay me, or I'll kill thee before we part from this spot!"

"Why, thou foolish and hot-brained churl," replied the Count, "what
right hast thou to the honour of dying by my blade? Thou art mad, or
hast drained the ale-cup so deeply that thou knowest not what thou
thinkest or sayest."

"Thou liest," said the Varangian; "though such a reproach be the utmost
scandal of thy race."

The Frenchman motioned his hand quicker than light to his sword, but
instantly withdrew it, and said with dignity, "thou canst not offend
me."

"But thou," said the exile, "hast offended me in a matter which can
only be atoned by thy manhood."

"Where and how?" answered the Count; "although it is needless to ask
the question, which thou canst not answer rationally."

"Thou hast this day," answered the Varangian, "put a mortal affront
upon a great prince, whom thy master calls his ally, and by whom thou
hast been received with every rite of hospitality. Him thou hast
affronted as one peasant at a merry-making would do shame to another,
and this dishonour thou hast done to him in the very face of his own
chiefs and princes, and the nobles from every court of Europe."

"It was thy master's part to resent my conduct," said the Frenchman,
"if in reality he so much felt it as an affront."

"But that," said Hereward, "did not consist with the manners of his
country to do. Besides that, we trusty Varangians esteem ourselves
bound by our oath as much to defend our Emperor, while the service
lasts, on every inch of his honour as on every foot of his territory; I
therefore tell thee, Sir Knight, Sir Count, or whatever thou callest
thyself, there is mortal quarrel between thee and the Varangian guard,
ever and until thou hast fought it out in fair and manly battle, body
to body, with one of the said Imperial Varangians, when duty and
opportunity shall permit:--and so God schaw the right!"

As this passed in the French language, the meaning escaped the
understanding of such Imperialists as were within hearing at the time;
and the Princess, who waited with some astonishment till the Crusader
and the Varangian had finished their conference, when it was over, said
to him with interest, "I trust you feel that poor man's situation to be
too much at a distance from your own, to admit of your meeting him in
what is termed knightly battle?"

"On such a question," said the knight, "I have but one answer to any
lady who does not, like my Brenhilda, cover herself with a shield, and
bear a sword by her side, and the heart of a knight in her bosom."

"And suppose for once," said the Princess Anna Comnena, "that I
possessed such titles to your confidence, what would your answer be to
me?"

"There can be little reason for concealing it," said the Count. "The
Varangian is a brave man, and a strong one; it is contrary to my vow to
shun his challenge, and perhaps I shall derogate from my rank by
accepting it; but the world is wide, and he is yet to be born who has
seen Robert of Paris shun the face of mortal man. By means of some
gallant officer among the Emperor's guards, this poor fellow, who
nourishes so strange an ambition, shall learn that he shall have his
wish gratified."

"And then?"--said Anna Comnena.

"Why, then," said the Count, "in the poor man's own language, God schaw
the right!"

"Which is to say," said the Princess, "that if my father has an officer
of his guards honourable enough to forward so pious and reasonable a
purpose, the Emperor must lose an ally, in whose faith he puts
confidence, or a most trusty and faithful soldier of his personal
guard, who has distinguished himself upon many occasions?"

"I am happy to hear," said the Count, "that the man bears such a
character. In truth, his ambition ought to have some foundation. The
more I think of it, the rather am I of opinion that there is something
generous, rather than derogatory, in giving to the poor exile, whose
thoughts are so high and noble, those privileges of a man of rank,
which some who were born in such lofty station are too cowardly to
avail themselves of. Yet despond not, noble Princess; the challenge is
not yet accepted of, and if it was, the issue is in the hand of God. As
for me, whose trade is war, the sense that I have something so serious
to transact with this resolute man, will keep me from other less
honourable quarrels, in which a lack of occupation might be apt to
involve me."

The Princess made no farther observation, being resolved, by private
remonstrance to Achilles Tatius, to engage him to prevent a meeting
which might be fatal to the one or the other of two brave men. The town
now darkened before them, sparkling, at the same time, through its
obscurity, by the many lights which illuminated the houses of the
citizens. The royal cavalcade held their way to the Golden Gate, where
the trusty centurion put his guard under arms to receive them.

"We must now break off, fair ladies," said the Count, as the party,
having now dismounted, were standing together at the private gate of
the Blacquernal Palace, "and find as we can, the lodgings which we
occupied last night."

"Under your favour, no," said the Empress. "You must be content to take
your supper and repose in quarters more fitting your rank; and," added
Irene, "with no worse quartermaster than one of the Imperial family who
hag been your travelling companion."

This the Count heard, with considerable inclination to accept the
hospitality which was so readily offered. Although as devoted as a man
could well be to the charms of his Brenhilda, the very idea never
having entered his head of preferring another's beauty to hers, yet,
nevertheless, he had naturally felt himself flattered by the attentions
of a woman of eminent beauty and very high rank; and the praises with
which the Princess had loaded him, had not entirely fallen to the
ground. He was no longer in the humour in which the morning had found
him, disposed to outrage the feelings of the Emperor, and to insult his
dignity; but, flattered by the adroit sycophancy which the old
philosopher had learned from the schools, and the beautiful Princess
had been gifted with by nature, he assented to the Empress's proposal;
the more readily, perhaps, that the darkness did not permit him to see
that there was distinctly a shade of displeasure on the brow of
Brenhilda. Whatever the cause, she cared not to express it, and the
married pair had just entered that labyrinth of passages through which
Hereward had formerly wandered, when a chamberlain, and a female
attendant, richly dressed, bent the knee before them, and offered them
the means and place to adjust their attire, ere they entered the
Imperial presence. Brenhilda looked upon her apparel and arms, spotted
with the blood of the insolent Scythian, and, Amazon as she was, felt
the shame of being carelessly and improperly dressed. The arms of the
knight were also bloody, and in disarrangement.

"Tell my female squire, Agatha, to give her attendance," said the
Countess. "She alone is in the habit of assisting to unarm and to
attire me."

"Now, God be praised," thought the Grecian lady of the bed-chamber,
"that I am not called to a toilet where smiths' hammers and tongs are
like to be the instruments most in request!"

"Tell Marcian, my armourer," said the Count, "to attend with the silver
and blue suit of plate and mail which I won in a wager from the Count
of Thoulouse." [Footnote: Raymond Count of Thoulouse, and St. Giles,
Duke of Carboune, and Marquis of Provence, an aged warrior who had won
high distinction in the contests against the Saracens in Spain, was the
chief leader of the Crusaders from the south of France. His title of
St. Giles is corrupted by Anna Comnena into _Sangles_, by which name
she constantly mentions him in the Alexiad.]

"Might I not have the honour of adjusting your armour," said a
splendidly drest courtier, with some marks of the armourer's
profession, "since I have put on that of the Emperor himself?--may his
name be sacred!"

"And how many rivets hast thou clenched upon the occasion with this
hand," said the Count, catching hold of it, "which looks as if it had
never been washed, save with milk of roses,--and with this childish
toy?" pointing to a hammer with ivory haft and silver head, which,
stuck into a milk-white kidskin apron, the official wore as badges of
his duty. The armourer fell back in some confusion. "His grasp," he
said to another domestic, "is like the seizure of a vice!"

While this little scene passed apart, the Empress Irene, her daughter,
and her son-in-law, left the company, under pretence of making a
necessary change in their apparel. Immediately after, Agelastes was
required to attend the Emperor, and the strangers were conducted to two
adjacent chambers of retirement, splendidly fitted up, and placed for
the present at their disposal, and that of their attendants. There we
shall for a time leave them, assuming, with the assistance of their own
attendants, a dress which their ideas regarded as most fit for a great
occasion; those of the Grecian court willingly keeping apart from a
task which they held nearly as formidable as assisting at the lair of a
royal tiger or his bride.

Agelastes found the Emperor sedulously arranging his most splendid
court-dress; for, as in the court of Pekin, the change of ceremonial
attire was a great part of the ritual observed at Constantinople.

"Thou hast done well, wise Agelastes," said Alexius to the philosopher,
as he approached with abundance of prostrations and genuflexions--"Thou
hast done well, and we are content with thee. Less than thy wit and
address must have failed in separating from their company this tameless
bull, and unyoked heifer, over whom, if we obtain influence, we shall
command, by every account, no small interest among those who esteem
them the bravest in the host."

"My humble understanding," said Agelastes, "had been infinitely
inferior to the management of so prudent and sagacious a scheme, had it
not been shaped forth and suggested by the inimitable wisdom of your
most sacred Imperial Highness."

"We are aware," said Alexius, "that we had the merit of blocking forth
the scheme of detaining these persons, either by their choice as
allies, or by main force as hostages. Their friends, ere yet they have
missed them, will be engaged in war with the Turks, and at no liberty,
if the devil should suggest such an undertaking, to take arms against
the sacred empire. Thus, Agelastes, we shall obtain hostages at least
as important and as valuable as that Count of Vermandois, whose liberty
the tremendous Godfrey of Bouillon extorted from us by threats of
instant war."

"Pardon," said Agelastes, "if I add another reason to those which of
themselves so heavily support your august resolution. It is possible
that we may, by observing the greatest caution and courtesy towards
these strangers, win them in good earnest to our side."

"I conceive you, I conceive you,"--said the Emperor; "and this very
night I will exhibit myself to this Count and his lady in the royal
presence chamber, in the richest robes which our wardrobe can furnish.
The lions of Solomon shall roar, the golden tree of Comnenus shall
display its wonders, and the feeble eyes of these Franks shall be
altogether dazzled by the splendour of the empire. These spectacles
cannot but sink into their minds, and dispose them to become the allies
and servants of a nation so much more powerful, skilful, and wealthy
than their own--Thou hast something to say, Agelastes. Years and long
study have made thee wise; though we have given our opinion, thou mayst
speak thine own, and live."

Thrice three times did Agelastes press his brow against the hem of the
Emperor's garment, and great seemed his anxiety to find such words as
might intimate his dissent from his sovereign, yet save him from the
informality of contradicting him expressly.

"These sacred words, in which your sacred Highness has uttered your
most just and accurate opinions, are undeniable, and incapable of
contradiction, were any vain enough to attempt to impugn them.
Nevertheless, be it lawful to say, that men show the wisest arguments
in vain to those who do not understand reason, just as you would in
vain exhibit a curious piece of limning to the blind, or endeavour to
bribe, as scripture saith, a sow by the offer of a precious stone. The
fault is not, in such case, in the accuracy of your sacred reasoning,
but in the obtuseness and perverseness of the barbarians to whom it is
applied."

"Speak more plainly," said the Emperor; "how often must we tell thee,
that in cases in which we really want counsel, we know we must be
contented to sacrifice ceremony?"

"Then in plain words," said Agelastes, "these European barbarians are
like no others under the cope of the universe, either on the things on
which they look with desire, or on those which they consider as
discouraging. The treasures of this noble empire, so far as they
affected their wishes, would merely inspire them with the desire to go
to war with a nation possessed of so much wealth, and who, in their
self-conceited estimation, were less able to defend, than they
themselves are powerful to assail. Of such a description, for instance,
is Bohemond of Tarentum,--and such, a one is many a crusader less able
and sagacious than he;--for I think I need not tell your Imperial
Divinity, that he holds his own self-interest to be the devoted guide
of his whole conduct through this extraordinary war; and that,
therefore, you can justly calculate his course, when once you are aware
from which point of the compass the wind of avarice and self-interest
breathes with respect to him. But there are spirits among the Franks of
a very different nature, and who must be acted upon by very different
motives, if we would make ourselves masters of their actions, and the
principles by which they are governed. If it were lawful to do so, I
would request your Majesty to look at the manner by which an artful
juggler of your court achieves his imposition upon the eyes of
spectators, yet needfully disguises the means by which he attains his
object. This people--I mean the more lofty-minded of these crusaders,
who act up to the pretences of the doctrines which they call
chivalry--despise the thirst of gold, and gold itself, unless to hilt
their swords, or to furnish forth some necessary expenses, as alike
useless and contemptible. The man who can be moved by the thirst of
gain, they contemn, scorn, and despise, and liken him, in the meanness
of his objects, to the most paltry serf that ever followed the plough,
or wielded the spade. On the other hand, if it happens that they
actually need gold, they are sufficiently unceremonious in taking it
where they can most easily find it. Thus, they are neither easily to be
bribed by giving them sums of gold, nor to be starved into compliance
by withholding what chance may render necessary for them. In the one
case, they set no value upon the gift of a little paltry yellow dross;
in the other, they are accustomed to take what they want."

"Yellow dross," interrupted Alexius. "Do they call that noble metal,
equally respected by Roman and barbarian, by rich and poor, by great
and mean, by churchmen and laymen, which all mankind are fighting for,
plotting for, planning for, intriguing for, and damning themselves for,
both soul and body--by the opprobrious name of yellow dross? They are
mad, Agelastes, utterly mad. Perils and dangers, penalties and
scourges, are the arguments to which men who are above the universal
influence which moves all others, can possibly be accessible."

"Nor are they," said Agelastes, "more accessible to fear than they are
to self-interest. They are indeed, from their boyhood, brought up to
scorn those passions which influence ordinary minds, whether by means
of avarice to impel, or of fear to hold back. So much is this the case,
that what is enticing to other men, must, to interest them, have the
piquant sauce of extreme danger. I told, for instance, to this very
hero, a legend of a Princess of Zulichium, who lay on an enchanted
couch, beautiful as an angel, awaiting the chosen knight who should, by
dispelling her enchanted slumbers, become master of her person, of her
kingdom of Zulichium, and of her countless treasures; and, would your
Imperial Majesty believe me, I could scarce get the gallant to attend
to my legend or take any interest in the adventure, till I assured him
he would have to encounter a winged dragon, compared to which the
largest of those in the Frank romances was but like a mere dragon-fly?"

"And did this move the gallant?" said the Emperor.

"So much so," replied the philosopher, "that had I not unfortunately,
by the earnestness of my description, awakened the jealousy of his
Penthesilea of a Countess, he had forgotten the crusade and all
belonging to it, to go in quest of Zulichium and its slumbering
sovereign."

"Nay, then," said the Emperor, "we have in our empire (make us sensible
of the advantage!) innumerable tale-tellers who are not possessed in
the slightest degree of that noble scorn of gold which is proper to the
Franks, but shall, for a brace of besants, lie with the devil, and beat
him to boot, if in that manner we can gain, as mariners say, the
weathergage of the Franks."

"Discretion," said Agelastes, "is in the highest degree necessary.
Simply to lie is no very great matter; it is merely a departure from
the truth, which is little different from missing a mark at archery,
where the whole horizon, one point alone excepted, will alike serve the
shooter's purpose; but to move the Frank as is desired, requires a
perfect knowledge of his temper and disposition, great caution and
presence of mind, and the most versatile readiness in changing from one
subject to another. Had I not myself been, somewhat alert, I might have
paid the penalty of a false step in your Majesty's service, by being
flung into my own cascade by the virago whom I offended."

"A perfect Thalestris!" said the Emperor; "I shall take care what
offence I give her."

"If I might speak and live," said Agelastes, "the Caesar Nicephorus
Briennius had best adopt the same precaution."

"Nicephorus," said the Emperor, "must settle that with our daughter. I
have ever told her that she gives him too much of that history, of
which a page or two is sufficiently refreshing; but by our own self we
must swear it, Agelastes, that, night after night, hearing nothing
else, would subdue the patience of a saint!--Forget, good Agelastes,
that them hast heard me say such a thing--more especially, remember it
not when thou art in presence of our Imperial wife and daughter."

"Nor were the freedoms taken by the Caesar beyond the bounds of an
innocent gallantry," said Agelastes; "but the Countess, I must needs
say, is dangerous. She killed this day the Scythian Toxartis, by what
seemed a mere fillip on the head."

"Hah!" said the Emperor; "I knew that Toxartis, and he was like enough
to deserve his death, being a bold unscrupulous marauder. Take notes,
however, how it happened, the names of witnesses, &c., that, if
necessary, we may exhibit the fact as a deed of aggression on the part
of the Count and Countess of Paris, to the assembly of the crusaders."

"I trust," said Agelastes, "your Imperial Majesty will not easily
resign the golden opportunity of gaining to your standard persons whose
character stands so very high in chivalry. It would cost you but little
to bestow upon them a Grecian island, worth a hundred of their own
paltry lordship of Paris; and if it were given under the condition of
their expelling the infidels or the disaffected who may have obtained
the temporary possession, it would be so much the more likely to be an
acceptable offer. I need not say that the whole knowledge, wisdom, and
skill of the poor Agelastes is at your Imperial Majesty's disposal."

The Emperor paused for a moment, and then said, as if on full
consideration, "Worthy Agelastes, I dare trust thee in this difficult
and somewhat dangerous matter; but I will keep my purpose of exhibiting
to them the lions of Solomon, and the golden tree of our Imperial
house."

"To that there can be no objection," returned the philosopher; "only
remember to exhibit few guards, for these Franks are like a fiery
horse; when in temper he may be ridden with a silk thread, but when he
has taken umbrage or suspicion, as they would likely do if they saw
many armed men, a steel bridle would not restrain him."

"I will be cautious," said the Emperor, "in that particular, as well as
others.--Sound the silver bell, Agelastes, that the officers of our
wardrobe may attend."

"One single word, while your Highness is alone," said Agelastes. "Will
your Imperial Majesty transfer to me the direction of your menagerie,
or collection of extraordinary creatures?"

"You make me wonder," said the Emperor, taking a signet, bearing upon
it a lion, with the legend, _Vicit Leo ex tribu Judae_. "This," he
said, "will give thee the command of our dens. And now, be candid for
once with thy master--for deception is thy nature even with me--By what
charm wilt thou subdue these untamed savages?"

"By the power of falsehood," replied Agelastes, with deep reverence.

"I believe thee an adept in it," said the Emperor. "And to which of
their foibles wilt thou address it?"

"To their love of fame," said the philosopher; and retreated backwards
out of the royal apartment, as the officers of the wardrobe entered to
complete the investment of the Emperor in his Imperial habiliments.




CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH.

     I will converse with iron-witted fools,
     And unrespective boys; none are for me,
     That look into me with considerate eyes;--
     High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.
                                    RICHARD III.


As they parted from each other, the Emperor and philosopher had each
their own anxious thoughts on the interview which had passed between
them; thoughts which they expressed in broken sentences and
ejaculations, though for the better understanding of the degree of
estimation in which they held each other, we will give them a more
regular and intelligible form.

"Thus, then," half muttered half said Alexius, but so low as to hide
his meaning from the officers of the wardrobe, who entered to do their
office,--"thus, then, this bookworm--this remnant of old heathen
philosophy, who hardly believes, so God save me, the truth of the
Christian creed, has topp'd his part so well that he forces his Emperor
to dissemble in his presence. Beginning by being the buffoon of the
court, he has wormed himself into all its secrets, made himself master
of all its intrigues, conspired with my own son-in-law against me,
debauched my guards,--indeed so woven his web of deceit, that my life
is safe no longer, than he believes me the imperial dolt which I have
affected to seem, in order to deceive him; fortunate that even so can I
escape his cautionary anticipation of my displeasure, by avoiding to
precipitate his measures of violence. But were this sudden storm of the
crusade fairly passed over, the ungrateful Caesar, the boastful coward
Achilles Tatius, and the bosom serpent Agelastes, shall know whether
Alexius Comnenus has been born their dupe. When Greek meets Greek,
comes the strife of subtlety, as well as the tug of war." Thus saying,
he resigned himself to the officers of his wardrobe, who proceeded to
ornament him as the solemnity required,

"I trust him not," said Agelastes, the meaning of whose gestures and
exclamations, we, in like manner, render into a connected meaning. "I
cannot, and do not trust him--he somewhat overacts his part. He has
borne himself upon other occasions with the shrewd wit of his family
the Comneni; yet he now trusts to the effect of his trumpery lions upon
such a shrewd people as the Franks and Normans, and seems to rely upon
me for the character of men with whom he has been engaged in peace and
war for many years. This can be but to gain my confidence; for there
were imperfect looks, and broken sentences, which seemed to say,
'Agelastes, the Emperor knows thee and confides not in thee.' Yet the
plot is successful and undiscovered, as far as can be judged; and were
I to attempt to recede now, I were lost for ever. A little time to
carry on this intrigue with the Frank, when possibly, by the assistance
of this gallant, Alexius shall exchange the crown for a cloister, or a
still narrower abode; and then, Agelastes, thou deservest to be blotted
from the roll of philosophers, if thou canst not push out of the throne
the conceited and luxurious Caesar, and reign in his stead, a second
Marcus Antoninus, when the wisdom of thy rule, long unfelt in a world
which has been guided by tyrants and voluptuaries, shall soon
obliterate recollection of the manner in which thy power was acquired.
To work then--be active, and be cautious. The time requires it, and the
prize deserves it."

While these thoughts passed through his mind, he arrayed himself, by
the assistance of Diogenes, in a clean suit of that simple apparel in
which he always frequented the court; a garb as unlike that of a
candidate for royalty, as it was a contrast to the magnificent robes
with which Alexius was now investing himself,

In their separate apartments, or dressing-rooms, the Count of Paris and
his lady put on the best apparel which they had prepared to meet such a
chance upon their journey. Even in France, Robert was seldom seen in
the peaceful cap and sweeping mantle, whose high plumes and flowing
folds were the garb of knights in times of peace. He was now arrayed in
a splendid suit of armour, all except the head, which was bare
otherwise than as covered by his curled locks. The rest of his person
was sheathed in the complete mail of the time, richly inlaid with
silver, which contrasted with the azure in which the steel was
damasked. His spurs were upon his heels--his sword was by his side, and
his triangular shield was suspended round his neck, bearing, painted
upon it, a number of _fleures-de-lis semees_, as it is called, upon the
field, being the origin of those lily flowers which after times reduced
to three only; and which were the terror of Europe, until they suffered
so many reverses in our own time.

The extreme height of Count Robert's person adapted him for a garb,
which had a tendency to make persons of a lower stature appear rather
dwarfish and thick when arrayed _cap-a-pie_. The features, with their
self-collected composure, and noble contempt of whatever could have
astounded or shaken an ordinary mind, formed a well-fitted capital to
the excellently proportioned and vigorous frame which they terminated.
The Countess was in more peaceful attire; but her robes were short and
succinct, like those of one who might be called to hasty exercise. The
upper part of her dress consisted of more than one tunic, sitting close
to the body, while a skirt, descending from the girdle, and reaching to
the ankles, embroidered elegantly but richly, completed an attire which
a lady might have worn in much more modern times. Her tresses were
covered with a light steel head-piece, though some of them, escaping,
played round her face, and gave relief to those handsome features which
might otherwise have seemed too formal, if closed entirely within the
verge of steel. Over these undergarments was flung a rich velvet cloak
of a deep green colour, descending from the head, where a species of
hood was loosely adjusted over the helmet, deeply laced upon its verges
and seams, and so long as to sweep the ground behind. A dagger of rich
materials ornamented a girdle of curious goldsmith's work, and was the
only offensive weapon which, notwithstanding her military occupation,
she bore upon this occasion.

The toilet--as modern times would say--of the Countess, was not nearly
so soon ended as that of Count Robert, who occupied his time, as
husbands of every period are apt to do, in little sub-acid complaints
between jest and earnest, upon the dilatory nature of ladies, and the
time which they lose in doffing and donning their garments. But when
the Countess Brenhilda came forth in the pride of loveliness, from the
inner chamber where she had attired herself, her husband, who was still
her lover, clasped her to his breast and expressed his privilege by the
kiss which he took as of right from a creature so beautiful. Chiding
him for his folly, yet almost returning the kiss which she received,
Brenhilda began now to wonder how they were to find their way to the
presence of the Emperor.

The query was soon solved, for a gentle knock at the door announced
Agelastes, to whom, as best acquainted with the Frankish manners, had
been committed, by the Emperor, the charge of introducing the noble
strangers. A distant sound, like that of the roaring of a lion, or not
unsimilar to a large and deep gong of modern times, intimated the
commencement of the ceremonial. The black slaves upon guard, who, as
hath been observed, were in small numbers, stood ranged in their state
dresses of white and gold, bearing in one hand a naked sabre, and in
the other a torch of white wax, which served to guide the Count and
Countess through the passages that led to the interior of the palace,
and to the most secret hall of audience.

The door of this _sanctum sanctorum_ was lower than usual, a simple
stratagem devised by some superstitious officer of the Imperial
household, to compel the lofty-crested Frank to lower his body, as he
presented himself in the Imperial presence. Robert, when the door flew
open, and he discovered in the background the Emperor seated upon his
throne amidst a glare of light, which was broken and reflected in ten
thousand folds by the jewels with which his vestments were covered,
stopt short, and demanded the meaning of introducing him through so low
an arch? Agelastes pointed to the Emperor by way of shifting from
himself a question which he could not have answered. The mute, to
apologize for his silence, yawned, and showed the loss of his tongue.

"Holy Virgin!" said the Countess, "what can these unhappy Africans have
done, to have deserved a condemnation which involves so cruel a fate?"

"The hour of retribution is perhaps come," said the Count, in a
displeased tone, while Agelastes, with such hurry as time and place
permitted, entered, making his prostrations and genuflexions, little
doubting that the Frank must follow him, and to do so must lower his
body to the Emperor. The Count, however, in the height of displeasure
at the trick which he conceived had been, intended him, turned himself
round, and entered the presence-chamber with his back purposely turned
to the sovereign, and did not face Alexius until he reached the middle
of the apartment, when he was joined by the Countess, who had made her
approach in a more seemly manner. The Emperor, who had prepared to
acknowledge the Count's expected homage in the most gracious manner,
found himself now even more unpleasantly circumstanced than when this
uncompromising Frank had usurped the royal throne in the course of the
day.

The officers and nobles who stood around, though a very select number,
were more numerous than usual, as the meeting was not held for counsel,
but merely for state. These assumed such an appearance of mingled
displeasure and confusion as might best suit with the perplexity of
Alexius, while the wily features of the Norman-Italian, Bohemond of
Tarentum, who was also present, had a singular mixture of fantastical
glee and derision. It is the misfortune of the weaker on such
occasions, or at least the more timid, to be obliged to take the petty
part of winking hard, as if not able to see what they cannot avenge.

Alexius made the signal that the ceremonial of the grand reception
should immediately commence. Instantly the lions of Solomon, which had
been newly furbished, raised their heads, erected their manes,
brandished their tails, until they excited the imagination of Count
Robert, who, being already on fire at the circumstances of his
reception, conceived the bellowing of these automata to be the actual
annunciation of immediate assault. Whether the lions, whose forms he
beheld, were actually lords of the forest,--whether they were mortals
who had suffered transformation,--whether they were productions of the
skill of an artful juggler or profound naturalist, the Count neither
knew nor cared. All that he thought of the danger was, it was worthy of
his courage; nor did his heart permit him a moment's irresolution. He
strode to the nearest lion, which seemed in the act of springing up,
and said, in a tone loud and formidable as its own, "How now, dog!" At
the same time he struck the figure with his clenched fist and steel
gauntlet with so much force, that its head burst, and the steps and
carpet of the throne were covered with wheels, springs, and other
machinery, which had been the means of producing its mimic terrors.

On this display of the real nature of the cause of his anger, Count
Robert could not but feel a little ashamed of having given way to
passion on such an occasion. He was still more confused when Bohemond,
descending from his station near the Emperor, addressed him in the
Frank language;--"You have done a gallant deed, truly, Count Robert, in
freeing the court of Byzantium from an object of fear which has long
been used to frighten peevish children and unruly barbarians!"

Enthusiasm has no greater enemy than ridicule. "Why, then," said Count
Robert, blushing deeply at the same time, "did they exhibit its
fantastic terrors to me? I am neither child nor barbarian."

"Address yourself to the Emperor, then, as an intelligent man,"
answered Bohemond. "Say something to him in excuse of your conduct, and
show that our bravery has not entirely run away with our common sense.
And hark you also, while I have a moment's speech of you,--do you and
your wife heedfully follow my example at supper!" These words were
spoken with a significant tone and corresponding look.

The opinion of Bohemond, from his long intercourse, both in peace and
war, with the Grecian Emperor, gave him great influence with the other
crusaders, and Count Robert yielded to his advice. He turned towards
the Emperor with something liker an obeisance than he had hitherto
paid. "I crave your pardon," he said, "for breaking that gilded piece
of pageantry; but, in sooth, the wonders of sorcery, and the portents
of accomplished and skilful jugglers, are so numerous in this country,
that one does not clearly distinguish what is true from what is false,
or what is real from what is illusory."

The Emperor, notwithstanding the presence of mind for which he was
remarkable, and the courage in which he was not held by his countrymen
to be deficient, received this apology somewhat awkwardly. Perhaps the
rueful complaisance with which he accepted the Count's apology, might
be best compared to that of a lady of the present day when an awkward
guest has broken a valuable piece of china. He muttered something about
the machines having been long preserved in the Imperial family, as
being made on the model of those which guarded the throne of the wise
King of Israel; to which the blunt plain-spoken Count expressed his
doubt in reply, whether the wisest prince in the world ever
condescended to frighten his subjects or guests by the mimic roarings
of a wooden lion. "If," said he, "I too hastily took it for a living
creature, I have had the worst, by damaging my excellent gauntlet in
dashing to pieces its timber skull."

The Emperor, after a little more had been said, chiefly on the same
subject, proposed that they should pass to the banquet-room.
Marshalled, accordingly, by the grand sewer of the Imperial table, and
attended by all present, excepting the Emperor and the immediate
members of his family, the Frankish guests were guided through a
labyrinth of apartments, each of which was filled with wonders of
nature and art, calculated to enhance their opinion of the wealth and
grandeur which had assembled together so much that was wonderful. Their
passage being necessarily slow and interrupted, gave the Emperor time
to change his dress, according to the ritual of his court, which did
not permit his appearing twice in the same vesture before the same
spectators. He took the opportunity to summon Agelastes into his
presence, and, that their conference might be secret, he used, in
assisting his toilet, the agency of some of the mutes destined for the
service of the interior.

The temper of Alexius Comnenus was considerably moved, although it was
one of the peculiarities of his situation to be ever under the
necessity of disguising the emotions of his mind, and of affecting, in
presence of his subjects, a superiority to human passion, which he was
far from feeling. It was therefore with gravity, and even reprehension,
that he asked, "By whose error it was that the wily Bohemond,
half-Italian, and half-Norman, was present at this interview? Surely,
if there be one in the crusading army likely to conduct that foolish
youth and his wife behind the scenes of the exhibition by which we
hoped to impose upon them, the Count of Tarentum, as he entitles
himself, is that person."

"It was that old man," said Agelastes, "(if I may reply and live,)
Michael Cantacuzene, who deemed that his presence was peculiarly
desired; but he returns to the camp this very night."

"Yes," said Alexius, "to inform Godfrey, and the rest of the crusaders,
that one of the boldest and most highly esteemed of their number is
left, with his wife, a hostage in our Imperial city, and to bring back,
perhaps, an alternative of instant war, unless they are delivered up!"

"If it is your Imperial Highness's will to think so," said Agelastes,
"you can suffer Count Robert and his wife to return to the camp with
the Italian-Norman."

"What?" answered the Emperor, "and so lose all the fruits of an
enterprise, the preparations for which have already cost us so much in
actual expense; and, were our heart made of the same stuff with that of
ordinary mortals, would have cost us so much more in vexation and
anxiety? No, no; issue warning to the crusaders, who are still on the
hither side, that farther rendering of homage is dispensed with, and
that they repair to the quays on the banks of the Bosphorus, by peep of
light to-morrow. Let our admiral, as he values his head, pass every man
of them over to the farther side before noon. Let there be largesses, a
princely banquet on the farther bank--all that may increase their
anxiety to pass. Then, Agelastes, we will trust to ourselves to meet
this additional danger, either by bribing the venality of Bohemond, or
by bidding defiance to the crusaders. Their forces are scattered, and
the chief of them, with the leaders themselves, are all now--or by far
the greater part--on the east side of the Bosphorus.--And now to the
banquet! seeing that the change of dress has been made sufficient to
answer the statutes of the household; since our ancestors chose to make
rules for exhibiting us to our subjects, as priests exhibit their
images at their shrines!"

"Under grant of life," said Agelastes, "it was not done
inconsiderately, but in order that the Emperor, ruled ever by the same
laws from father to son, might ever be regarded as something beyond the
common laws of humanity--the divine image of a saint, therefore, rather
than a human being."

"We know it, good Agelastes," answered the Emperor, with a smile, "and
we are also aware, that many of our subjects, like the worshippers of
Bel in holy writ, treat us so far as an image, as to assist us in
devouring the revenues of our provinces, which are gathered in our
name, and for our use. These things we now only touch lightly, the time
not suiting them."

Alexius left the secret council accordingly, after the order for the
passage of the crusaders had been written out and subscribed in due
form, and in the sacred ink of the Imperial chancery.

Meantime, the rest of the company had arrived in a hall, which, like
the other apartments in the palace, was most tastefully as well as
gorgeously fitted up, except that a table, which presented a princely
banquet, might have been deemed faulty in this respect, that the
dishes, which were most splendid, both in the materials of which they
were composed, and in the viands which they held, were elevated by
means of feet, so as to be upon a level with female guests as they sat,
and with men as they lay recumbent at the banquet which it offered.

Around stood a number of black slaves richly attired, while the grand
sewer, Michael Cantazucene, arranged the strangers with his golden
wand, and conveyed orders to them, by signs, that all should remain
standing around the table, until a signal should be given.

The upper end of the board, thus furnished, and thus surrounded, was
hidden by a curtain of muslin and silver, which fell from the top of
the arch under which the upper part seemed to pass. On this curtain the
sewer kept a wary eye; and when he observed it slightly shake, he waved
his wand of office, and all expected the result.

As if self-moved, the mystic curtain arose, and discovered behind it a
throne eight steps higher than the end of the table, decorated in the
most magnificent manner, and having placed before it a small table of
ivory inlaid with silver, behind which was seated Alexius Comnenus, in
a dress entirely different from what he had worn in the course of the
day, and so much more gorgeous than his former vestments, that it
seemed not unnatural that his subjects should prostrate themselves
before a figure so splendid. His wife, his daughter, and his son-in-law
the Caesar, stood behind him with faces bent to the ground, and it was
with deep humility, that, descending from the throne at the Emperor's
command, they mingled with the guests of the lower table, and, exalted
as they were, proceeded to the festive board at the signal of the grand
sewer. So that they could not be said to partake of the repast with the
Emperor, nor to be placed at the Imperial table, although they supped
in his presence, and were encouraged by his repeated request to them to
make good cheer. No dishes presented at the lower table were offered at
the higher; but wines, and more delicate sorts of food, which arose
before the Emperor as if by magic, and seemed designed for his own
proper use, were repeatedly sent, by his special directions, to one or
other of the guests whom Alexius delighted to honour--among these the
Franks being particularly distinguished.

The behaviour of Bohemond was on this occasion particularly remarkable.

Count Robert, who kept an eye upon him, both from his recent words, and
owing to an expressive look which he once or twice darted towards him,
observed, that in no liquors or food, not even those sent from the
Emperor's own table, did this astucious prince choose to indulge. A
piece of bread, taken from the canister at random, and a glass of pure
water, was the only refreshment of which he was pleased to partake. His
alleged excuse was, the veneration due to the Holy Festival of the
Advent, which chanced to occur that very night, and which both the
Greek and Latin rule agree to hold sacred.

"I had not expected this of you, Sir Bohemond," said the Emperor, "that
you should have refused my personal hospitality at my own board, on the
very day on which you honoured me by entering into my service as vassal
for the principality of Antioch."

"Antioch is not yet conquered," said Sir Bohemond; "and conscience,
dread sovereign, must always have its exceptions, in whatever temporal
contracts we may engage."

"Come, gentle Count," said the Emperor, who obviously regarded
Bohemond's inhospitable humour as something arising more from suspicion
than devotion, "we invite, though it is not our custom, our children,
our noble guests, and our principal officers here present, to a general
carouse. Fill the cups called the Nine Muses! let them be brimful of
the wine which is said to be sacred to the Imperial lips!"

At the Emperor's command the cups were filled; they were of pure gold,
and there was richly engraved upon each the effigy of the Muse to whom
it was dedicated.

"You at least," said the Emperor, "my gentle Count Robert, you and your
lovely lady, will not have any scruple to pledge your Imperial host?"

"If that scruple is to imply suspicion of the provisions with which we
are here served, I disdain to nourish such," said Count Robert. "If it
is a sin which I commit by tasting wine to-night, it is a venial one;
nor shall I greatly augment my load by carrying it, with the rest of my
trespasses, to the next confessional."

"Will you then, Prince Bohemond, not be ruled by the conduct of your
friend?" said the Emperor.

"Methinks," replied the Norman-Italian, "my friend might have done
better to have been, ruled by mine; but be it as his wisdom pleases.
The flavour of such exquisite wine is sufficient for me."

"So saying, he emptied the wine into another goblet, and seemed
alternately to admire the carving of the cup, and the flavour of what
it had lately contained.

"You are right, Sir Bohemond," said the Emperor; "the fabric of that
cup is beautiful; it was done by one of the ancient gravers of Greece.
The boasted cup of Nestor, which Homer has handed down to us, was a
good deal larger perhaps, but neither equalled these in the value of
the material, nor the exquisite beauty of the workmanship. Let each
one, therefore, of my stranger guests, accept of the cup which he
either has or might have drunk out of, as a recollection of me; and may
the expedition against the infidels be as propitious as their
confidence and courage deserve!"

"If I accept your gift, mighty Emperor," said Bohemond, "it is only to
atone for the apparent discourtesy, when my devotion, compels me to
decline your Imperial pledge, and to show you that we part on the most
intimate terms of friendship."

So saying, he bowed deeply to the Emperor, who answered him with a
smile, into which was thrown, a considerable portion of sarcastic
expression.

"And I," said the Count of Paris, "having taken upon my conscience the
fault of meeting your Imperial pledge, may stand excused from incurring
the blame of aiding to dismantle your table of these curious drinking
cups. We empty them to your health, and we cannot in any other respect
profit by them."

"But Prince Bohemond can," said the Emperor; "to whose quarters they
shall be carried, sanctioned by your generous use. And we have still a
set for you, and for your lovely Countess, equal to that of the Graces,
though no longer matching in number the nymphs of Parnassus.--The
evening bell rings, and calls us to remember the hour of rest, that we
may be ready to meet the labours of to-morrow."

The party then broke up for the evening. Bohemond left the palace that
night, not forgetting the Muses, of whom he was not in general a
devotee. The result was, as the wily Greek had intended, that he had
established between Bohemond and the Count, not indeed a quarrel, but a
kind of difference of opinion; Bohemond feeling that the fiery Count of
Paris must think his conduct sordid and avaricious, while Count Robert
was far less inclined than before to rely on him as a counsellor.




CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH.


The Count of Paris and his lady were that night lodged in the Imperial
Palace of the Blacquernal. Their apartments were contiguous, but the
communication between them was cut off for the night by the mutual door
being locked and barred. They marvelled somewhat at this precaution.
The observance, however, of the festival of the Church, was pleaded as
an admissible, and not unnatural excuse for this extraordinary
circumstance. Neither the Count nor his lady entertained, it may be
believed, the slightest personal fear for any thing which could happen
to them. Their attendants, Marcian and Agatha, having assisted their
master and mistress in the performance of their usual offices, left
them, in order to seek the places of repose assigned to them among
persons of their degree.

The preceding day had been one of excitation, and of much bustle and
interest; perhaps, also, the wine, sacred to the Imperial lips, of
which Count Robert had taken a single, indeed, but a deep draught, was
more potent than the delicate and high-flavoured juice of the Gascogne
grape, to which he was accustomed; at any rate, it seemed to him that,
from the time he felt that he had slept, daylight ought to have been
broad in his chamber when he awaked, and yet it was still darkness
almost palpable. Somewhat surprised, he gazed eagerly around, but could
discern nothing, except two balls of red light which shone from among
the darkness with a self-emitted brilliancy, like the eyes of a wild
animal while it glares upon its prey. The Count started from bed to put
on his armour, a necessary precaution if what he saw should really be a
wild creature and at liberty; but the instant he stirred, a deep growl
was uttered, such as the Count had never heard, but which might be
compared to the sound of a thousand monsters at once; and, as the
symphony, was heard the clash of iron chains, and the springing of a
monstrous creature towards the bedside, which appeared, however, to be
withheld by some fastening from attaining the end of its bound. The
roars which it uttered now ran thick on each other. They were most
tremendous, and must have been heard throughout the whole palace. The
creature seemed to gather itself many yards nearer to the bed than by
its glaring eyeballs it appeared at first to be stationed, and how much
nearer, or what degree of motion, might place him within the monster's
reach, the Count was totally uncertain. Its breathing was even heard,
and Count Robert thought he felt the heat of its respiration, while his
defenceless limbs might not be two yards distant from the fangs which
he heard grinding against each other, and the claws which tore up
fragments of wood from the oaken floor. The Count of Paris was one of
the bravest men who lived in a time when bravery was the universal
property of all who claimed a drop of noble blood, and the knight was a
descendant of Charlemagne. He was, however, a man, and therefore cannot
be said to have endured unappalled a sense of danger so unexpected and
so extraordinary. But his was not a sudden alarm or panic, it was a
calm sense of extreme peril, qualified by a resolution to exert his
faculties to the uttermost, to save his life if it were possible. He
withdrew himself within the bed, no longer a place of rest, being thus
a few feet further from the two glaring eyeballs which remained so
closely fixed upon him, that, in spite of his courage, nature painfully
suggested the bitter imagination of his limbs being mangled, torn, and
churned with their life-blood, in the jaws of some monstrous beast of
prey. One saving thought alone presented itself--this might be a trial,
an experiment of the philosopher Agelastes, or of the Emperor his
master, for the purpose of proving the courage of which the Christians
vaunted so highly, and punishing the thoughtless insult which the Count
had been misadvised enough to put upon the Emperor the preceding day.

"Well is it said," he reflected in his agony, "beard not the lion in
his den! Perhaps even, now some base slave deliberates whether I have
yet tasted enough of the preliminary agonies of death, and whether he
shall yet slip the chain which keeps the savage from doing his work.
But come death when it will, it shall never be said that Count Robert
was heard to receive it with prayers for compassion, or with cries of
pain or terror." He turned his face to the wall, and waited, with a
strong mental exertion, the death which he conceived to be fast
approaching.

His first feelings had been unavoidably of a selfish nature. The danger
was too instant, and of a description too horrible, to admit of any
which involved a more comprehensive view of his calamity; and other
reflections of a more distant kind, were at first swallowed up in the
all-engrossing thought of immediate death. But as his ideas became
clearer, the safety of his Countess rushed upon his mind--what might
she now be suffering! and, while he was subjected to a trial so
extraordinary, for what were her weaker frame and female courage
reserved? Was she still within a few yards of him, as when he lay down
the last night? or had the barbarians, who had devised for him a scene
so cruel, availed themselves of his and his lady's incautious
confidence to inflict upon her some villany of the same kind, or even
yet more perfidious? Did she sleep or wake, or could she sleep within
the close hearing of that horrible cry, which shook all around? He
resolved to utter her name, warning her, if possible, to be upon her
guard, and to answer without venturing rashly into the apartment which
contained a guest so horribly perilous.

He uttered, therefore, his wife's name, but in trembling accents, as if
he had been afraid of the savage beast overhearing him.

"Brenhilda! Brenhilda!--there is danger-awake, and speak to me, but do
not arise." There was no answer.--"What am I become," he said to
himself, "that I call upon Brenhilda of Aspramonte, like a child on its
sleeping nurse, and all because there is a wild-cat in the same room
with me? Shame on thee, Count of Paris! Let thy arms be rent, and thy
spurs be hacked from thy heels!--What ho!" he cried aloud, but still
with a tremulous voice, "Brenhilda, we are beset, the foe are upon us!
--Answer me, but stir not."

A deep growl from the monster which garrisoned his apartment was the
only answer. The sound seemed to say, "Thou hast no hope!" and it ran
to the knight's bosom as the genuine expression of despair.

"Perhaps, however, I am still too cold in making my misery known. What
ho! my love! Brenhilda!"

A voice, hollow and disconsolate as that which might have served an
inhabitant of the grave, answered as if from a distance. "What
disconsolate wretch art thou, who expectest that the living can answer
thee from the habitations of the dead?"

"I am a Christian man, a free noble of the kingdom of France," answered
the Count. "Yesterday the captain of five hundred men, the bravest in
France--the bravest, that is, who breathe mortal air--and I am here
without a glimpse of light, to direct me how to avoid the corner in
which lies a wild tiger-cat, prompt to spring upon and to devour me."

"Thou art an example," replied the voice, "and wilt not long be the
last, of the changes of fortune. I, who am now suffering in my third
year, was that mighty Ursel, who rivalled Alexius Comnenus for the
Crown of Greece, was betrayed by my confederates, and being deprived of
that eyesight which is the chief blessing of humanity, I inhabit these
vaults, no distant neighbour of the wild animals by whom they are
sometimes occupied, and whose cries of joy I hear when unfortunate
victims like thyself are delivered up to their fury."

"Didst thou not then hear," said Count Robert, in return, "a warlike
guest and his bride conducted hither last night, with sounds as it
might seem, of bridal music?--O, Brenhilda! hast thou, so young--so
beautiful--been so treacherously done to death by means so unutterably
horrible!"

"Think not," answered Ursel, as the voice had called its owner, "that
the Greeks pamper their wild beasts on such lordly fare. For their
enemies, which term includes not only all that are really such, but all
those whom they fear or hate, they have dungeons whose locks never
revolve; hot instruments of steel, to sear the eyeballs in the head;
lions and tigers, when it pleases them to make a speedy end of their
captives--but these are only for the male prisoners. While for the
women--if they be young and beautiful, the princes of the land have
places in their bed and bower; nor are they employed like the captives
of Agamemnon's host, to draw water from an Argive spring, but are
admired and adored by those whom fate has made the lords of their
destiny."

"Such shall never be the doom of Brenhilda!" exclaimed Count Robert;
"her husband still lives to assist her, and should he die, she knows
well how to follow him without leaving a blot in the epitaph of either."

The captive did not immediately reply, and a short pause ensued, which
was broken by Ursel's voice. "Stranger," he said, "what noise is that I
hear?"

"Nay, I hear nothing," said Count Robert.

"But I do," said Ursel. "The cruel deprivation of my eyesight renders
my other senses more acute."

"Disquiet not thyself about the matter, fellow-prisoner," answered the
Count, "but wait the event in silence."

Suddenly a light arose in the apartment, lurid, red, and smoky. The
knight had bethought him of a flint and match which he usually carried
about him, and with as little noise as possible had lighted the torch
by the bedside; this he instantly applied to the curtains of the bed,
which, being of thin muslin, were in a moment in flames. The knight
sprung, at the same instant, from his bed. The tiger, for such it was,
terrified at the flame, leaped backwards as far as his chain would
permit, heedless of any thing save this new object of terror. Count
Robert upon this seized on a massive wooden stool, which was the only
offensive weapon on which he could lay his hand, and, marking at those
eyes which now reflected the blaze of fire, and which had recently
seemed so appalling, he discharged against them this fragment of
ponderous oak, with a force which less resembled human strength than
the impetus with which an engine hurls a stone. He had employed his
instant of time so well, and his aim was so true, that the missile went
right to the mark and with incredible force. The skull of the tiger,
which might be, perhaps, somewhat exaggerated if described as being of
the very largest size, was fractured by the blow, and with the
assistance of his dagger, which had fortunately been left with him, the
French Count despatched the monster, and had the satisfaction to see
him grin his last, and roll, in the agony of death, those eyes which
were lately so formidable.

Looking around him, he discovered, by the light of the fire which he
had raised, that the apartment in which he now lay was different from
that in which he had gone to bed overnight; nor could there be a
stronger contrast between the furniture of both, than the flickering
half-burnt remains of the thin muslin curtains, and the strong, bare,
dungeon-looking walls of the room itself, or the very serviceable
wooden stool, of which he had made such good use.

The knight had no leisure to form conclusions upon such a subject. He
hastily extinguished the fire, which had, indeed, nothing that it could
lay hold of, and proceeded, by the light of the flambeau, to examine
the apartment, and its means of entrance. It is scarce necessary to
say, that he saw no communication with the room of Brenhilda, which
convinced him that they had been separated the evening before under
pretence of devotional scruples, in order to accomplish some most
villanous design upon one or both of them. His own part of the night's
adventure we have already seen, and success, so far, over so formidable
a danger, gave him a trembling hope that Brenhilda, by her own worth
and valour, would be able to defend herself against all attacks of
fraud or force, until he could find his way to her rescue. "I should
have paid more regard," he said, "to Bohemond's caution last night,
who, I think, intimated to me as plainly as if he had spoke it in
direct terms, that that same cup of wine was a drugged potion. But
then, fie upon him for an avaricious hound! How was it possible I
should think he suspected any such thing, when he spoke not out like a
man, but, for sheer coldness of heart, or base self-interest, suffered
me to run the risk of being poisoned by the wily despot?"

Here he heard a voice from the same quarter as before. "Ho, there! Ho,
stranger! Do you live, or have you been murdered? What means this
stifling smell of smoke? For God's sake, answer him who can receive no
information from eyes, closed, alas, for ever!"

"I am at liberty," said the Count, "and the monster destined to devour
me has groaned its last. I would, my friend Ursel, since such is thy
name, thou hadst the advantage of thine eyes, to have borne witness to
yonder combat; it had been worth thy while, though thou shouldst have
lost them a minute afterwards, and it would have greatly advantaged
whoever shall have the task of compiling my history."

While he gave a thought to that vanity which strongly ruled him, he
lost no time in seeking some mode of escape from the dungeon, for by
that means only might he hope to recover his Countess. At last he found
an entrance in the wall, but it was strongly locked and bolted. "I have
found the passage,"--he called out; "and its direction is the same in
which thy voice is heard--But how shall I undo the door?"

"I'll teach thee that secret," said Ursel. "I would I could as easily
unlock each bolt that withholds us from the open air; but, as for thy
seclusion within the dungeon, heave up the door by main strength, and
thou shalt lift the locks to a place where, pushing then the door from
thee, the fastenings will find a grooved passage in the wall, and the
door itself will open. Would that I could indeed see thee, not only
because, being a gallant man, thou must be a goodly sight, but also
because I should thereby know that I was not caverned in darkness for
ever."

While he spoke thus, the Count made a bundle of his armour, from which
he missed nothing except his sword, Tranchefer, and then proceeded to
try what efforts he could make, according to the blind man's
instructions, to open the door of his prison-house. Pushing in a direct
line was, he soon found, attended with no effect; but when he applied
his gigantic strength, and raised the door as high as it would go, he
had the satisfaction to find that the bolts yielded, though
reluctantly. A space had been cut so as to allow them to move out of
the socket into which they had been forced; and without the turn of a
key, but by a powerful thrust forwards, a small passage was left open.
The knight entered, bearing his armour in his hand.

"I hear thee," said Ursel, "O stranger! and am aware thou art come into
my place of captivity. For three years have I been employed in cutting
these grooves, corresponding to the sockets which hold these iron
bolts, and preserving the knowledge of the secret from the
prison-keepers. Twenty such bolts, perhaps, must be sawn through, ere
my steps shall approach the upper air. What prospect is there that I
shall have strength of mind sufficient to continue the task? Yet,
credit me, noble stranger, I rejoice in having been thus far aiding to
thy deliverance; for if Heaven blesses not, in any farther degree, our
aspirations after freedom, we may still be a comfort to each other,
while tyranny permits our mutual life."

Count Robert looked around, and shuddered that a human being should
talk of any thing approaching to comfort, connected with his residence
in what seemed a living tomb. Ursel's dungeon was not above twelve feet
square, vaulted in the roof, and strongly built in the walls by stones
which the chisel had morticed closely together. A bed, a coarse
footstool, like that which Robert had just launched at the head of the
tiger, and a table of equally massive materials, were its only articles
of furniture. On a long stone, above the bed, were these few, but
terrible words:--Zedekias Ursel, imprisoned here on the Ides of March,
A.D.----. Died and interred on the spot"--A blank was left for filling
up the period. The figure of the captive could hardly be discerned amid
the wildness of his dress and dishabille. The hair of his head, uncut
and uncombed, descended in elf-locks, and mingled with a beard of
extravagant length.

"Look on me," said the captive, "and rejoice that thou canst yet see
the wretched condition to which iron-hearted tyranny can reduce a
fellow-creature, both in mortal existence and in future hope."

"Was it thou," said Count Robert, whose blood ran cold in his veins,
"that hadst the heart to spend thy time in sawing through the blocks of
stone by which these bolts are secured?"

"Alas!" said Ursel, "what could a blind man do? Busy I must be, if I
would preserve my senses. Great as the labour was, it was to me the
task of three years; nor can you wonder that I should have devoted to
it my whole time, when I had no other means of occupying it. Perhaps,
and most likely, my dungeon does not admit the distinction of day and
night; but a distant cathedral clock told me how hour after hour fled
away, and found me expending them in rubbing one stone against another.
But when the door gave way, I found I had only cut an access into a
prison more strong than that which held me. I rejoice, nevertheless,
since it has brought us together, given thee an entrance to my dungeon,
and me a companion in my misery."

"Think better than that," said Count Robert, "think of liberty--think
of revenge! I cannot believe such unjust treachery will end
successfully, else needs must I say, the heavens are less just than
priests tell us of. How art thou supplied with food in this dungeon of
thine?"

"A warder," said Ursel, "and who, I think, understands not the Greek
language--at least he never either answers or addresses me--brings a
loaf and a pitcher of water, enough to supply my miserable life till
two days are past. I must, therefore, pray that you will retire for a
space into the next prison, so that the warder may have no means of
knowing that we can hold correspondence together."

"I see not," said Count Robert, "by what access the barbarian, if he is
one, can enter my dungeon without passing through yours; but no matter,
I will retire into the inner or outer room, whichever it happens to be,
and be thou then well aware that the warder will have some one to
grapple with ere he leaves his prison-work to-day. Meanwhile, think
thyself dumb as thou art blind, and be assured that the offer of
freedom itself would not induce me to desert the cause of a companion
in adversity."

"Alas," said the old man, "I listen to thy promises as I should to
those of the morning gale, which tells me that the sun is about to
rise, although I know that I at least shall never behold it. Thou art
one of those wild and undespairing knights, whom for so many years the
west of Europe hath sent forth to attempt impossibilities, and from
thee, therefore, I can only hope for such a fabric of relief as an idle
boy would blow out of soap bubbles."

"Think better of us, old man," said Count Robert, retiring; "at least
let me die with my blood warm, and believing it possible for me to be
once more united to my beloved Brenhilda."

So saying, he retired into his own cell, and replaced the door, so that
the operations of Ursel, which indeed were only such as three years'
solitude could have achieved, should escape observation when again
visited by the Warder. "It is ill luck," said he, when once more within
his own prison--for that in which the tiger had been secured, he
instinctively concluded to be destined for him--"It is ill luck that I
had not found a young and able fellow-captive, instead of one decrepit
by imprisonment, blind, and broken down past exertion. But God's will
be done! I will not leave behind me the poor wretch whom I have found
in such a condition, though he is perfectly unable to assist me in
accomplishing my escape, and is rather more likely to retard it.
Meantime, before we put out the torch, let us see, if, by close
examination, we can discover any door in the wall save that to the
blind man's dungeon. If not, I much suspect that my descent has been
made through the roof. That cup of wine--that Muse, as they called it,
had a taste more like medicine than merry companions' pledge."

He began accordingly a strict survey of the walls, which he resolved to
conclude by extinguishing the torch, that he might take the person who
should enter his dungeon darkling and by surprise, For a similar
reason, he dragged into the darkest corner the carcass of the tiger,
and covered it with the remains of the bed-clothes, swearing at the
same time, that a half tiger should be his crest in future, if he had
the fortune, which his bold heart would not suffer him to doubt, of
getting through the present danger. "But," he added, "if these
necromantic vassals of hell shall raise the devil upon, me, what shall
I do then? And so great is the chance, that methinks I would fain
dispense with extinguishing the flambeau. Yet it is childish for one
dubbed in the chapel of Our Lady of the Broken Lances, to make much
difference between a light room and a dark one. Let them come, as many
fiends as the cell can hold, and we shall see if we receive them not as
becomes a Christian knight; and surely, Our Lady, to whom I was ever a
true votary, will hold it an acceptable sacrifice that I tore myself
from my Brenhilda, even for a single moment, in honour of her advent,
and thus led the way for our woful separation. Fiends! I defy ye in the
body as in the spirit, and I retain the remains of this flambeau until
some more convenient opportunity." He dashed it against the wall as he
spoke, and then quietly sat down in a corner, to watch what should next
happen.

Thought after thought chased each other through his mind. His
confidence in his wife's fidelity, and his trust in her uncommon
strength and activity, were the greatest comforts which he had; nor
could her danger present itself to him in any shape so terrible, but
that he found consolation in these reflections: "She is pure," he said,
"as the dew of heaven, and heaven will not abandon its own."




CHAPTER THE SIXTEENTH.

      Strange ape of man! who loathes thee while he scorns thee.
      Half a reproach to us and half a jest.
      What fancies can be ours ere we have pleasure
      In viewing our own form, our pride and passions,
      Reflected in a shape grotesque as thine!
                                             ANONYMOUS.


Count Robert of Paris having ensconced himself behind the ruins of the
bed, so that he could not well be observed, unless a strong light was
at once flung upon the place of his retreat, waited with anxiety how
and in what manner the warder of the dungeon, charged with the task of
bringing food to the prisoners, should make himself visible; nor was it
long ere symptoms of his approach began to be heard and observed.

A light was partially seen, as from a trap-door opening in the roof,
and a voice was heard to utter these words in Anglo-Saxon, "Leap,
sirrah; come, no delay; leap, my good Sylvan, show your honour's
activity." A strange chuckling hoarse voice, in a language totally
unintelligible to Count Robert, was heard to respond, as if disputing
the orders which were received.

"What, sir," said his companion, "you must contest the point, must you?
Nay, if thou art so lazy, I must give your honour a ladder, and perhaps
a kick to hasten your journey." Something then, of very great size, in
the form of a human being, jumped down from the trap-door, though the
height might be above fourteen feet. This figure was gigantic, being
upwards of seven feet high. In its left hand it held a torch, and in
its right a skein of fine silk, which unwinding itself as it descended,
remained unbroken, though it was easy to conceive it could not have
afforded a creature so large any support in his descent from the roof.
He alighted with perfect safety and activity upon his feet, and, as if
rebounding from the floor, he sprung upwards again, so as almost to
touch the roof. In this last gambaud the torch which he bore was
extinguished; but this extraordinary warder whirled it round his head
with infinite velocity, so that it again ignited. The bearer, who
appeared to intend the accomplishment of this object, endeavoured to
satisfy himself that it was really attained by approaching, as if
cautiously, its left hand to the flame of the torch. This practical
experiment seemed attended with consequences which the creature had not
expected, for it howled with pain, shaking the burnt hand, and
chattering as if bemoaning itself.

"Take heed there, Sylvanus!" said the same voice in Anglo-Saxon, and in
a tone of rebuke. "Ho, there! mind thy duty, Sylvan! Carry food to the
blind man, and stand not there to play thyself, lest I trust thee not
again alone on such an errand!"

The creature--for it would have been rash to have termed it a
man--turning its eye upwards to the place from whence the voice came,
answered with a dreadful grin and shaking of its fist, yet presently
began to undo a parcel, and rummage in the pockets of a sort of jerkin
and pantaloons which it wore, seeking, it appeared, a bunch of keys,
which at length it produced, while it took from the pocket a loaf of
bread. Heating the stone of the wall, it affixed the torch to it by a
piece of wax, and then cautiously looked out for the entrance to the
old man's dungeon, which it opened with a key selected from the bunch.
Within the passage it seemed to look for and discover the handle of a
pump, at which it filled a pitcher that it bore, and bringing back the
fragments of the former loaf, and remains of the pitcher of water, it
ate a little, as if it were in sport, and very soon making a frightful
grimace, flung the fragments away. The Count of Paris, in the
meanwhile, watched anxiously the proceedings of this unknown animal.
His first thought was, that the creature, whose limbs were so much
larger than humanity, whose grimaces were so frightful, and whose
activity seemed supernatural, could be no other than the Devil himself,
or some of his imps, whose situation and office in those gloomy regions
seemed by no means hard to conjecture. The human voice, however, which
he had heard, was less that of a necromancer conjuring a fiend than
that of a person giving commands to a wild animal, over whom he had, by
training, obtained a great superiority.

"A shame on it," said the Count, "if I suffer a common jackanapes,--for
such I take this devil-seeming beast to be, although twice as large as
any of its fellows whom I have ever seen,--to throw an obstacle in the
way of my obtaining daylight and freedom! Let us but watch, and the
chance is that we make that furry gentleman our guide to the upper
regions."

Meantime the creature, which rummaged about everywhere, at length.
discovered the body of the tiger,--touched it, stirred it, with many
strange motions, and seemed to lament and wonder at its death. At once
it seemed struck with the idea that some one must have slain it, and
Count Robert had the mortification to see it once more select the key,
and spring towards the door of Ursel's prison with such alacrity, that
had its intention been to strangle him, it would have accomplished its
purpose before the interference of Count Robert could have prevented
its revenge taking place. Apparently, however, it reflected, that for
reasons which seemed satisfactory, the death of the tiger could not be
caused by the unfortunate Ursel, but had been accomplished by some one
concealed within the outer prison.

Slowly grumbling, therefore, and chattering to itself, and peeping
anxiously into every corner, the tremendous creature, so like yet so
very unlike to the human form, came stealing along the walls, moving
whatever he thought could seclude a man from his observation. Its
extended legs and arms were protruded forward with great strides, and
its sharp eyes, on the watch to discover the object of its search, kept
prying, with the assistance of the torch, into every corner.

Considering the vicinity of Alexius's collection of animals, the
reader, by this time, can have little doubt that the creature in
question, whose appearance seemed to the Count of Paris so very
problematical, was a specimen of that gigantic species of ape--if it is
not indeed some animal more nearly allied to ourselves--to which, I
believe, naturalists have given the name of the Ourang Outang. This
creature differs from the rest of its fraternity, in being
comparatively more docile and serviceable: and though possessing the
power of imitation which is common to the whole race, yet making use of
it less in mere mockery, than in the desire of improvement and
instruction perfectly unknown to his brethren. The aptitude which it
possesses of acquiring information, is surprisingly great, and
probably, if placed in a favourable situation, it might admit of being
domesticated in a considerable degree; but such advantages the ardour
of scientific curiosity has never afforded this creature. The last we
have heard of was seen, we believe, in the Island of Sumatra--it was of
great size and strength, and upwards of seven feet high. It died
defending desperately its innocent life against a party of Europeans,
who, we cannot help thinking, might have better employed the
superiority which their knowledge gave them over the poor native of the
forest. It was probably this creature, seldom seen, but when once seen
never forgotten, which occasioned the ancient belief in the god Pan,
with his sylvans and satyrs. Nay, but for the gift of speech, which we
cannot suppose any of the family to have attained, we should have
believed the satyr seen by St. Anthony in the desert to have belonged
to this tribe.

We can, therefore, the more easily credit the annals which attest that
the collection of natural history belonging to Alexius Comnenus,
preserved an animal of this kind, which had been domesticated and
reclaimed to a surprising extent, and showed a degree of intelligence
never perhaps to be attained in any other case. These explanations
being premised, we return to the thread of our story.

The animal advanced with long noiseless steps; its shadow on the wall,
when it held the torch so as to make it visible to the Frank, forming
another fiend-resembling mimicry of its own large figure and
extravagant-looking members. Count Robert remained in his lurking hole,
in no hurry to begin a strife, of which it was impossible to foretell
the end. In the meantime, the man of the woods came nigh, and every
step by which he approached, caused the Count's heart to vibrate almost
audibly, at the idea of meeting danger of a nature so strange and new.
At length the creature approached the bed--his hideous eyes were fixed
on those of the Count; and, as much surprised at seeing him as Robert
was at the meeting, he skipped about fifteen paces backwards at one
spring, with a cry of instinctive terror, and then advanced on tiptoe,
holding his torch as far forward as he could, between him and the
object of his fears, as if to examine him at the safest possible
distance. Count Robert caught up a fragment of the bedstead, large
enough to form a sort of club, with which he menaced the native of the
wilds.

Apparently this poor creature's education, like education of most
kinds, had not been acquired without blows, of which the recollection
was as fresh as that of the lessons which they enforced. Sir Robert of
Paris was a man at once to discover and to avail himself of the
advantage obtained by finding that he possessed a degree of ascendancy
over his enemy, which he had not suspected. He erected his warlike
figure, assumed a step as if triumphant in the lists, and advanced
threatening his enemy with his club, as he would have menaced his
antagonist with the redoutable Tranchefer. The man of the woods, on the
other hand, obviously gave way, and converted his cautious advance into
a retreat no less cautious. Yet apparently the creature had not
renounced some plan of resistance; he chattered in an angry and hostile
tone, held out his torch in opposition, and seemed about to strike the
crusader with it. Count Robert, however, determined to take his
opponent at advantage, while his fears influenced him, and for this
purpose resolved, if possible, to deprive him of his natural
superiority in strength and agility, which his singular form showed he
could not but possess over the human species. A master of his weapon,
therefore, the Count menaced his savage antagonist with a stroke on the
right side of his head, but suddenly averting the blow, struck him with
his whole force on the left temple, and in an instant was kneeling
above him, when, drawing his dagger, he was about to deprive him of
life.

The Ourang Outang, ignorant of the nature of this new weapon with which
he was threatened, attempted at one and the same moment, to rise from
the ground, overthrow his antagonist, and wrench the dagger from his
grasp. In the first attempt, he would probably have succeeded; and as
it was, he gained his knees, and seemed likely to prevail in the
struggle, when he became sensible that the knight, drawing his poniard
sharply through his grasp, had cut his paw severely, and seeing him aim
the trenchant weapon at his throat, became probably aware that his
enemy had his life at command. He suffered himself to be borne
backwards without further resistance, with a deep wailing and
melancholy cry, having in it something human, which excited compassion.
He covered his eyes with the unwounded hand, as if he would have hid
from his own sight the death which seemed approaching him.

Count Robert, notwithstanding his military frenzy, was, in ordinary
matters, a calm-tempered and mild man, and particularly benevolent to
the lower classes of creation. The thought rushed through his mind,
"Why take from this unfortunate monster the breath which is in its
nostrils, after which it cannot know another existence? And then, may
it not be some prince or knight changed to this grotesque shape, that
it may help to guard these vaults, and the wonderful adventures that
attach to them? Should I not, then, be guilty of a crime by slaying
him, when he has rendered himself, rescue or no rescue, which he has
done as completely as his transformed figure permits; and if he be
actually a bestial creature, may he not have some touch of gratitude? I
have heard the minstrels sing the lay of Androcles and the Lion. I will
be on my guard with him."'

So saying, he rose from above the man of the woods, and permitted him.
also to arise. The creature seemed sensible of the clemency, for he
muttered in a low and supplicating tone, which seemed at once to crave
for mercy, and to return thanks for what he had already experienced. He
wept too, as he saw the blood dropping from his wound, and with an
anxious countenance, which had more of the human now that it was
composed into an expression of pain and melancholy, seemed to await in
terror the doom of a being more powerful than himself.

The pocket which the knight wore under his armour, capable of
containing but few things, had, however, some vulnerary balsam, for
which its owner had often occasion, a little lint, and a small roll of
linen; these the knight took out, and motioned to the animal to hold
forth his wounded hand. The man of the woods obeyed with hesitation and
reluctance, and Count Robert applied the balsam and the dressings,
acquainting his patient, at the same time, in a severe tone of voice,
that perhaps he did wrong in putting to his use a balsam compounded for
the service of the noblest knights; but that, if he saw the least sign
of his making an ungrateful use of the benefit he had conferred, he
would bury the dagger, of which he had felt the efficacy, to the very
handle, in his body.

The Sylvan looked fixedly upon Count Robert, almost as if he understood
the language used to him, and, making one of its native murmurs, it
stooped to the earth, kissed the feet of the knight, and embracing his
knees, seemed to swear to him eternal gratitude and fidelity.
Accordingly, when the Count retired to the bed and assumed his armour,
to await the re-opening of the trap-door, the animal sat down by his
side, directing its eyes in the line with his, and seemed quietly to
wait till the door should open. After waiting about an hour, a slight
noise was heard in the upper chamber, and the wild man plucked the
Frank by the cloak, as if to call his attention to what was about to
happen. The same voice which had before spoken, was, after a whistle or
two, heard to call, "Sylvan, Sylvan! where loiterest thou? Come
instantly, or, by the rood, thou shalt abye thy sloth!"

The poor monster, as Trinculo might have called him, seemed perfectly
aware of the meaning of this threat, and showed his sense of it by
pressing close to the side of Count Robert, making at the same time a
kind of whining, entreating, it would seem, the knight's protection.
Forgetting the great improbability there was, even in his own opinion,
that the creature could understand him, Count Robert said, "Why, my
friend, thou hast already learned the principal court prayer of this
country, by which men. entreat permission, to speak and live. Fear
nothing, poor creature--I am thy protector."

"Sylvan! what, ho!" said the voice again; "whom hast thou got for a
companion?--some of the fiends, or ghosts of murdered men, who they say
are frequent in these dungeons? or dost thou converse with the old
blind rebel Grecian?--or, finally, is it true what men say of thee,
that thou canst talk intelligibly when thou wilt, and only gibberest
and chatterest for fear thou art sent to work? Come, thou lazy rascal!
thou shalt have the advantage of the ladder to ascend by, though thou
needest it no more than a daw to ascend the steeple of the Cathedral of
St. Sophia. [Footnote: Now the chief mosque of the Ottoman capital.]
Come along then," he said, putting a ladder down the trap-door, "and
put me not to the trouble of descending to fetch thee, else, by St.
Swithin, it shall be the worse for thee. Come along, therefore, like a
good fellow, and for once I shall spare the whip."

The animal, apparently, was moved by this rhetoric, for, with a doleful
look, which Count Robert saw by means of the nearly extinguished torch,
he seemed to bid him farewell, and to creep away towards the ladder
with the same excellent good-will wherewith a condemned criminal
performs the like evolution. But no sooner did the Count look angry,
and shake the formidable dagger, than the intelligent animal seemed at
once to take his resolution, and clenching his hands firmly together in
the fashion of one who has made up his mind, he returned from the
ladder's foot, and drew up behind Count Robert,--with the air, however,
of a deserter, who feels himself but little at home when called into
the field against his ancient commander.

In a short time the warder's patience was exhausted, and despairing of
the Sylvan's voluntary return, he resolved to descend in quest of him.
Down the ladder he came, a bundle of keys in one hand, the other
assisting his descent, and a sort of dark lantern, whose bottom was so
fashioned that he could wear it upon his head like a hat. He had scarce
stept on the floor, when he was surrounded by the nervous arms of the
Count of Paris. At first the warder's idea was, that he was seized by
the recusant Sylvan.

"How now, villain!" he said; "let me go, or thou shalt die the death."

"Thou diest thyself," said the Count, who, between the surprise and his
own skill in wrestling, felt fully his advantage in the struggle.

"Treason! treason!" cried the warder, hearing by the voice that a
stranger had mingled in the contest; "help, ho! above there! help,
Hereward--Varangian!--Anglo-Saxon, or whatever accursed name thou
callest thyself!"

While he spoke thus, the irresistible grasp of Count Robert seized his
throat, and choked his utterance. They fell heavily, the jailor
undermost, upon the floor of the dungeon, and Robert of Paris, the
necessity of whose case excused the action, plunged his dagger in the
throat of the unfortunate. Just as he did so, a noise of armour was
heard, and, rattling down the ladder, our acquaintance Hereward stood
on the floor of the dungeon. The light, which had rolled from the head
of the warder, continued to show him streaming with blood, and in the
death-grasp of a stranger. Hereward hesitated not to fly to his
assistance, and, seizing upon the Count of Paris at the same advantage
which that knight had gained over his own adversary a moment before,
held him forcibly down with his face to the earth. Count Robert was one
of the strongest men of that military age; but then so was the
Varangian; and save that the latter had obtained a decided advantage by
having his antagonist beneath him, it could not certainly have been
conjectured which way the combat was to go.

"Yield, as your own jargon goes, rescue or no rescue," said the
Varangian, "or die on the point of my dagger!"

"A French Count never yields," answered Robert, who began to conjecture
with what sort of person he was engaged, "above all to a vagabond slave
like thee!" With this he made an effort to rise, so sudden, so strong,
so powerful, that he had almost freed himself from the Varangian's
grasp, had not Hereward, by a violent exertion of his great strength,
preserved the advantage he had gained, and raised his poniard to end
the strife for ever; but a loud chuckling laugh of an unearthly sound
was at this instant heard. The Varangian's extended arm was seized with
vigour, while a rough arm embracing his throat, turned him over on his
back, and gave the French Count an opportunity of springing up.

"Death to thee, wretch!" said the Varangian, scarce knowing whom he
threatened; but the man of the woods apparently had an awful
recollection of the prowess of human beings. He fled, therefore,
swiftly up the ladder, and left Hereward and his deliverer to fight it
out with what success chance might determine between them.

The circumstances seemed to argue a desperate combat; both were tall,
strong, and courageous, both had defensive armour, and the fatal and
desperate poniard was their only offensive weapon. They paused facing
each other, and examined eagerly into their respective means of defence
before hazarding a blow, which, if it missed, its attaint would
certainly be fatally requited. During this deadly pause, a gleam shone
from the trapdoor above, as the wild and alarmed visage of the man of
the woods was seen peering down by the light of a newly kindled torch
which he held as low into the dungeon as he well could.

"Fight bravely, comrade," said Count Robert of Paris, "for we no longer
battle in private; this respectable person, having chosen to constitute
himself judge of the field."

Hazardous as his situation was, the Varangian looked up, and was so
struck with the wild and terrified expression which the creature had
assumed, and the strife between curiosity and terror which its
grotesque features exhibited, that he could not help bursting into a
fit of laughter.

"Sylvan is among those," said Hereward, "who would rather hold the
candle to a dance so formidable than join in it himself."

"Is there then," said Count Robert, "any absolute necessity that thou
and I perform this dance at all?"

"None but our own pleasure," answered Hereward; "for I suspect there is
not between us any legitimate cause of quarrel demanding to be fought
out in such a place, and before such a spectator. Thou art, if I
mistake not, the bold Frank, who was yesternight imprisoned in this
place with, a tiger, chained within no distant spring of his bed?"

"I am," answered the Count.

"And where is the animal who was opposed to thee?"

"He lies yonder," answered the Count, "never again to be the object of
more terror than the deer whom he may have preyed on in his day." He
pointed to the body of the tiger, which Hereward examined by the light
of the dark lantern already mentioned.

"And this, then, was thy handiwork?" said the wondering Anglo-Saxon.

"Sooth to say it was," answered the Count, with indifference.

"And thou hast slain my comrade of this strange watch?" said the
Varangian.

"Mortally wounded him at the least," said Count Robert.

"With your patience, I will be beholden to you for a moment's truce,
while I examine his wound," said Hereward.

"Assuredly," answered the Count; "blighted be the arm which strikes a
foul blow at an open antagonist!"

Without demanding further security, the Varangian quitted his posture
of defence and precaution, and set himself, by the assistance of the
dark lantern, to examine the wound of the first warder who appeared on
the field, who seemed, by his Roman military dress, to be a soldier of
the bands called Immortals. Pie found him in the death-agony, but still
able to speak.

"So, Varangian, thou art come at last,--and is it to thy sloth or
treachery that I am to impute my fate?--Nay, answer me not!--The
stranger struck me over the collar-bone--had we lived long together, or
met often, I had done the like by thee, to wipe out the memory of
certain transactions at the Golden Gate.--I know the use of the knife
too well to doubt the effect of a blow aimed over the collar-bone by so
strong a hand--I feel it coming. The Immortal, so called, becomes now,
if priests say true, an immortal indeed, and Sebastes of Mytilene's bow
is broken ere his quiver is half emptied."

The robber Greek sunk back in Hereward's arms, and closed his life with
a groan, which was the last sound he uttered. The Varangian laid the
body at length on the dungeon floor.

"This is a perplexed matter," he said; "I am certainly not called upon
to put to death a brave man, although my national enemy, because he
hath killed a miscreant who was privately meditating my own murder.
Neither is this a place or a light by which to fight as becomes the
champions of two nations. Let that quarrel be still for the
present.--How say you then, noble sir, if we adjourn the present
dispute till we effect your deliverance from the dungeons of the
Blacquernal, and your restoration to your own friends and followers? If
a poor Varangian should be of service to you in this matter, would you,
when it was settled, refuse to meet him in fair fight, with your
national weapons or his own?"

"If," said Count Robert, "whether friend or enemy, thou wilt extend thy
assistance to my wife, who is also imprisoned somewhere in this
inhospitable palace, be assured, that whatever be thy rank, whatever be
thy country, whatever be thy condition, Robert of Paris will, at thy
choice, proffer thee his right hand in friendship, or raise it against
thee in fair and manly battle--a strife not of hatred, but of honour
and esteem; and this I vow by the soul of Charlemagne, my ancestor, and
by the shrine of my patroness, Our Lady of the Broken Lances."

"Enough said," replied Hereward. "I am as much bound to the assistance
of your Lady Countess, being a poor exile, as if I were the first in
the ranks of chivalry; for if any thing can make the cause of worth and
bravery yet more obligatory, it must be its being united with that of a
helpless and suffering female."

"I ought," said Count Robert, "to be here silent, without loading thy
generosity with farther requests; yet thou art a man, whom, if fortune
has not smiled at thy birth, by ordaining thee to be born within the
ranks of noblesse and knighthood, yet Providence hath done thee more
justice by giving thee a more gallant heart than is always possessed, I
fear, by those who are inwoven in the gayest wreath of chivalry. There
lingers here in these dungeons, for I cannot say he lives--a blind old
man, to whom for three years every thing beyond his prison has been a
universal blot. His food is bread and water, his intercourse limited to
the conversation of a sullen warder, and if death can ever come as a
deliverer, it must be to this dark old man. What sayst thou? Shall he,
so unutterably miserable, not profit by perhaps the only opportunity of
freedom that may ever occur to him?"

"By St. Dunstan," answered the Varangian, "thou keepest over truly the
oath thou hast taken as a redresser of wrongs! Thine own case is
well-nigh desperate, and thou art willing to make it utterly so by
uniting with it that of every unhappy person whom fate throws in thy
way!"

"The more of human misery we attempt to relieve," said Robert of Paris,
"the more we shall carry with us the blessing of our merciful saints,
and Our Lady of the Broken Lances, who views with so much pain every
species of human suffering or misfortune, save that which occurs within
the enclosure of the lists. But come, valiant Anglo-Saxon, resolve me
on my request as speedily as thou canst. There is something in thy face
of candour as well as sense, and it is with no small confidence that I
desire to see us set forth in quest of my beloved Countess, who, when
her deliverance is once achieved, will be a powerful aid to us in
recovering that of others."

"So be it, then," said the Varangian; "we will proceed in quest of the
Countess Brenhilda; and if, on recovering her, we find ourselves strong
enough to procure the freedom of the dark old man, my cowardice, or
want of compassion, shall never stop the attempt."




CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH.

     'Tis strange that, in the dark sulphureous mine,
     Where wild ambition piles its ripening stores
     Of slumbering thunder, Love will interpose
     His tiny torch, and cause the stern explosion
     To burst, when the deviser's least aware.
                                         ANONYMOUS.


About noon of the same day, Agelastes met with Achilles Tatius, the
commander of the Varangian guard, in those ruins of the Egyptian temple
in which we formerly mentioned Hereward having had an interview with
the philosopher. They met, as it seemed, in a very different humour.
Tatius was gloomy, melancholy, and downcast; while the philosopher
maintained the calm indifference which procured for him, and in some
sort deserved, the title of the Elephant. "Thou blenchest, Achilles
Tatius," said the philosopher, "now that thou hast frankly opposed
thyself to all the dangers which stood between thee and greatness. Thou
art like the idle boy who turned the mill-stream upon the machine, and
that done, instead of making a proper use of it, was terrified at
seeing it in motion."

"Thou dost me wrong, Agelastes," answered the Acolyte, "foul wrong; I
am but like the mariner, who although determined upon his voyage, yet
cannot forbear a sorrowing glance at the shore, before he parts with
it, it may be, for ever."

"It may have been right to think of this, but pardon me, valiant
Tatius, when I tell you the account should have been made up before;
and the grandson of Alguric the Hun ought to have computed chances and
consequences ere he stretched his hand to his master's diadem."

"Hush! for Heaven's sake," said Tatius, looking round; "that, thou
knowest, is a secret between our two selves; for if Nicephorus, the
Caesar, should learn it, where were we and our conspiracy?"

"Our bodies on the gibbet, probably," answered Agelastes, "and our
souls divorced from them, and in the way of discovering the secrets
which thou hast hitherto taken upon trust."

"Well," said Achilles, "and should not the consciousness of the
possibility of this fate render us cautious?"

"Cautious _men_, if you will," answered Agelastes, "but not timid
children."

"Stone walls can hear,"--said the Follower, lowering his voice.
"Dionysius the tyrant, I have read, had an ear which conveyed to him
the secrets spoken within his state-prison at Syracuse."

"And that Ear is still stationary at Syracuse," said the philosopher.
"Tell me, my most simple friend, art thou afraid it has been
transported hither in one night, as the Latins believe of Our Lady's
house of Loretto?"

"No," answered Achilles, "but in an affair so important too much
caution cannot be used."

"Well, thou most cautious of candidates for empire, and most cold of
military leaders, know that the Caesar, deeming, I think, that there is
no chance of the empire falling to any one but himself, hath taken in
his head to consider his succession to Alexius as a matter of course,
whenever the election takes place. In consequence, as matters of course
are usually matters of indifference, he has left all thoughts of
securing his interest upon, this material occasion to thee and to me,
while the foolish voluptuary hath himself run mad--for what think you?
Something between man and woman,--female in her lineaments, her limbs,
and a part at least of her garments; but, so help me St. George, most
masculine in the rest of her attire, in her propensities, and in her
exercises."

"The Amazonian wife, thou meanest," said Achilles, "of that iron-handed
Frank, who dashed to pieces last night the golden lion of Solomon with
a blow of his fist? By St. George, the least which can come of such an
amour is broken bones."

"That," said Agelastes, "is not quite so improbable as that Dionysius's
Ear should fly hither from Syracuse in a single night; but he is
presumptuous in respect of the influence which his supposed good looks
have gained him among the Grecian dames."

"He was too presumptuous, I suppose," said Achilles Tatius, "to make a
proper allowance for his situation as Caesar, and the prospect of his
being Emperor."

"Meantime," said Agelastes, "I have promised him an interview with his
Bradamante, who may perhaps reward his tender epithets of _Zoe kai
psyche_, [Footnote: "Life and Soul."] by divorcing his amorous soul
from his unrivalled person."

"Meantime," said the Follower, "thou obtainest, I conclude, such orders
and warrants as the Caesar can give for the furtherance of our plot?"

"Assuredly," said Agelastes, "it is an opportunity not to be lost. This
love fit, or mad fit, has blinded him; and without exciting too much
attention to the progress of the plot, we can thus in safety conduct
matters our own way, without causing malevolent remarks; and though I
am conscious that, in doing so, I act somewhat at variance with my age
and character, yet the end being to convert a worthy Follower into an
Imperial Leader, I shame me not in procuring that interview with the
lady, of which the Caesar, as they term him, is so desirous.--What
progress, meanwhile, hast thou made with the Varangians, who are, in
respect of execution, the very arm of our design?"

"Scarce so good as I could wish," said Achilles Tatius; "yet I have
made sure of some two or three score of those whom I found most
accessible; nor have I any doubt, that when the Caesar is set aside,
their cry will be for Achilles Tatius."

"And what of the gallant who assisted at our prelections?" said
Agelastes; "your Edward, as Alexius termed him?"

"I have made no impression upon him," said the Follower; "and I am
sorry for it, for he is one whom his comrades think well of, and would
gladly follow. Meantime I have placed him as an additional sentinel
upon the iron-witted Count of Paris, whom, both having an inveterate
love of battle, he is very likely to put to death; and if it is
afterwards challenged by the crusaders as a cause of war, it is only
delivering up the Varangian, whose personal hatred will needs be
represented as having occasioned the catastrophe. All this being
prepared beforehand, how and when shall we deal with the Emperor?"

"For that," said Agelastes, "we must consult the Caesar, who, although
his expected happiness of to-day is not more certain than the state
preferment that he expects to-morrow, and although his ideas are much
more anxiously fixed upon his success with this said Countess than his
succession to the empire, will, nevertheless, expect to be treated as
the head of the enterprise for accelerating the latter. But, to speak
my opinion, valiant Tatius, to-morrow will be the last day that Alexius
shall hold the reins of empire."

"Let me know for certain," said the Follower, "as soon as thou canst,
that I may warn our brethren, who are to have in readiness the
insurgent citizens, and those of the Immortals who are combined with
us, in the neighbourhood of the court, and in readiness to act--And,
above all, that I may disperse upon distant guards such Varangians as I
cannot trust."

"Rely upon me," said Agelastes, "for the most accurate information and
instructions, so soon as I have seen Nicephorus Briennius. One word
permit me to ask--in what manner is the wife of the Caesar to be
disposed of?"

"Somewhere," said the Follower, "where I can never be compelled to hear
more of her history. Were it not for that nightly pest of her lectures,
I could be good-natured enough to take care of her destiny myself, and
teach her the difference betwixt a real emperor and this Briennius, who
thinks so much of himself." So saying, they separated; the Follower
elated in look and manner considerably above what he had been when they
met.

Agelastes looked after his companion with a scornful laugh. "There," he
said, "goes a fool, whose lack of sense prevents his eyes from being
dazzled by the torch which cannot fail to consume them. A half-bred,
half-acting, half-thinking, half-daring caitiff, whose poorest
thoughts--and those which deserve that name must be poor indeed--are
not the produce of his own understanding. He expects to circumvent the
fiery, haughty, and proud Nicephorus Briennius! If he does so, it will
not be by his own policy, and still less by his valour. Nor shall Anna
Comnena, the soul of wit and genius, be chained to such an
unimaginative log as yonder half-barbarian. No--she shall have a
husband of pure Grecian extraction, and well stored with that learning
which was studied when Rome was great, and Greece illustrious. Nor will
it be the least charm of the Imperial throne, that it is partaken by a
partner whose personal studies have taught her to esteem and value
those of the Emperor." He took a step or two with conscious elevation,
and then, as conscience-checked, he added, in a suppressed voice, "But
then, if Anna were destined for Empress, it follows of course that
Alexius must die--no consent could be trusted.--And what then?--the
death of an ordinary man is indifferent, when it plants on the throne a
philosopher and a historian; and at what time were possessors of the
empire curious to enquire when or by whose agency their predecessors
died?--Diogenes! Ho, Diogenes!" The slave did not immediately come, so
that Agelastes, wrapt in the anticipation of his greatness, had time to
add a few more words "Tush--I must reckon with Heaven, say the priests,
for many things, so I will throw this also into the account. The death
of the Emperor may be twenty ways achieved without my having the blame
of it. The blood which we have shed may spot our hand, if closely
regarded, but it shall scarce stain our forehead." Diogenes here
entered--"Has the Frank lady been removed?" said the philosopher.

The slave signified his assent.

"How did she bear her removal?"

"As authorised by your lordship, indifferently well. She had resented
her separation from her husband, and her being detained in the palace,
and committed some violence upon the slaves of the Household, several
of whom were said to be slain, although we perhaps ought only to read
sorely frightened. She recognised me at once, and when I told her that
I came to offer her a day's retirement in your own lodgings, until it
should be in your power to achieve the liberation of her husband, she
at once consented, and I deposited her in the secret Cytherean
garden-house."

"Admirably done, my faithful Diogenes," said the philosopher; "thou art
like the genii who attended on the Eastern talisman; I have but to
intimate my will to thee, and it is accomplished."

Diogenes bowed deeply, and withdrew.

"Yet remember, slave!" said Agelastes, speaking to himself; "there is
danger in knowing too much---and should my character ever become
questioned, too many of my secrets are in the power of Diogenes."

At this moment a blow thrice repeated, and struck upon one of the
images without, which had been so framed as to return a tingling sound,
and in so far deserved the praise of being vocal, interrupted his
soliloquy.

"There knocks," said he, "one of our allies; who can it be that comes
so late?" He touched the figure of Iris with his staff, and the Caesar
Nicephorus Briennius entered in the full Grecian habit, and that
graceful dress anxiously arranged to the best advantage. "Let me hope,
my Lord," said Agelastes, receiving the Caesar with an apparently grave
and reserved face, "your Highness comes to tell me that your sentiments
are changed on reflection, and that whatever you had to confer about
with this Frankish lady, may be at least deferred until the principal
part of our conspiracy has been successfully executed."

"Philosopher," answered the Caesar, "no. My resolution, once taken, is
not the sport of circumstances. Believe me, that I have not finished so
many labours without being ready to undertake others. The favour of
Venus is the reward of the labours of Mars, nor would I think it worth
while to worship the god armipotent with the toil and risk attending
his service, unless I had previously attained some decided proofs that
I was wreathed with the myrtle, intimating the favour of his beautiful
mistress."

"I beg pardon for my boldness," said Agelastes; "but has your Imperial
Highness reflected, that you were wagering, with the wildest rashness,
an empire, including thine own life, mine, and all who are joined with
us, in a hardy scheme? And against what were they waged? Against the
very precarious favour of a woman, who is altogether divided betwixt
fiend and female, and in either capacity is most likely to be fatal to
our present scheme, either by her good will, or by the offence which
she may take. If she prove such as you wish, she will desire to keep
her lover by her side, and to spare him the danger of engaging in a
perilous conspiracy; and if she remains, as the world believe her,
constant to her husband, and to the sentiments she vowed to him at the
altar, you may guess what cause of offence you are likely to give, by
urging a suit which she has already received so very ill."

"Pshaw, old man! Thou turnest a dotard, and in the great knowledge thou
possessest of other things, hast forgotten the knowledge best worth
knowing---that of the beautiful part of the creation. Think of the
impression likely to be made by a gallant neither ignoble in situation,
nor unacceptable in presence, upon a lady who must fear the
consequences of refusal! Come, Agelastes, let me have no more of thy
croaking, auguring bad fortune like the raven from the blasted oak on
the left hand; but declaim, as well thou canst, how faint heart never
won fair lady, and how those best deserve empire who can wreathe the
myrtles of Venus with the laurels of Mars. Come, man, undo me the
secret entrance which combines these magical ruins with groves that are
fashioned rather like those of Cytheros or Naxos."

"It must be as you will!" said the philosopher, with a deep and
somewhat affected sigh.

"Here, Diogenes!" called aloud the Caesar; "when thou art summoned,
mischief is not far distant. Come, undo the secret entrance. Mischief,
my trusty negro, is not so distant but she will answer the first
clatter of the stones."

The negro looked at his master, who returned him a glance acquiescing
in the Caesar's proposal. Diogenes then went to a part of the ruined
wall which was covered by some climbing shrubs, all of which he
carefully removed. This showed a little postern door, closed
irregularly, and filled up, from the threshold to the top, with large
square stones, all of which the slave took out and piled aside, as if
for the purpose of replacing them. "I leave thee," said Agelastes to
the negro, "to guard this door, and let no one enter, except he has the
sign, upon the peril of thy life. It were dangerous it should be left
open at this period of the day."

The obsequious Diogenes put his hand to his sabre and to his head, as
if to signify the usual promise of fidelity or death, by which those in
his condition generally expressed their answer to their master's
commands. Diogenes then lighted a small lantern, and pulling out a key,
opened an inner door of wood, and prepared to step forward.

"Hold, friend Diogenes," said the Caesar; "thou wantest not my lantern,
to discern an honest man, whom, if thou didst seek, I must needs say
thou hast come to the wrong place to find one. Nail thou up these
creeping shrubs before the entrance of the place, and abide thou there
as already directed, till our return, to parry the curiosity of any who
may be attracted by the sight of the private passage."

The black slave drew back as he gave the lamp to the Caesar, and
Agelastes followed the light through a long, but narrow, arched
passage, well supplied with air from space to space, and not neglected
in the inside to the degree which its exterior would have implied.

"I will not enter with you into the Gardens," said Agelastes, "or to
the bower of Cytherea, where I am too old to be a worshipper. Thou
thyself, I think, Imperial Caesar, art well aware of the road, having
travelled it divers times! and, if I mistake not, for the fairest
reasons."

"The more thanks," said the Caesar, "are due to mine excellent friend
Agelastes, who forgets his own age to accommodate the youth of his
friends."




CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH.


We must now return to the dungeon of the Blacquernal, where
circumstances had formed at least a temporary union between the stout
Varangian and Count Robert of Paris, who had a stronger resemblance to
each other in their dispositions than probably either of them would
have been willing to admit. The virtues of the Varangian were all of
that natural and unrefined kind which Nature herself dictates to a
gallant man, to whom a total want of fear, and the most prompt alacrity
to meet danger, had been attributes of a life-long standing. The Count,
on the other hand, had all that bravery, generosity, and love of
adventure, which was possessed by the rude soldier, with the virtues,
partly real, partly fantastic, which those of his rank and country
acquired from the spirit of chivalry. The one might be compared to the
diamond as it came from the mine, before it had yet received the
advantages of cutting and setting; the other was the ornamented gem,
which, cut into facets and richly set, had lost perhaps a little of its
original substance, yet still, at the same time, to the eye of an
inspector, had something more showy and splendid than when it was,
according to the phrase of lapidaries, _en brut_. In the one case, the
value was more artificial; in the other, it was the more natural and
real of the two. Chance, therefore, had made a temporary alliance
between two men, the foundation of whose characters bore such strong
resemblance to each other, that they were only separated by a course of
education, which had left rigid prejudices on both sides, and which
prejudices were not unlikely to run counter to each other. The
Varangian commenced his conversation with the Count in a tone of
familiarity, approaching nearer to rudeness than the speaker was aware
of, and much of which, though most innocently intended by Hereward,
might be taken amiss by his new brother in arms. The most offensive
part of his deportment, however, was a blunt, bold disregard to the
title of those whom he addressed, adhering thereby to the manners of
the Saxons, from whom he drew his descent, and which was likely to be
at least unpleasing to the Franks as well as Normans, who had already
received and become very tenacious of the privileges of the feudal
system, the mummery of heraldry, and the warlike claims assumed by
knights, as belonging only to their own order.

Hereward was apt, it must be owned, to think too little of these
distinctions; while he had at least a sufficient tendency to think
enough of the power and wealth of the Greek empire which he served,--of
the dignity inherent in Alexius Comnenus, and which he was also
disposed to grant to the Grecian officers, who, under the Emperor,
commanded his own corps, and particularly to Achilles Tatius. This man
Hereward knew to be a coward, and half-suspected to be a villain.
Still, however, the Follower was always the direct channel through
which the Imperial graces were conferred on the Varangians in general,
as well as upon Hereward himself; and he had always the policy to
represent such favours as being more or less indirectly the consequence
of his own intercession. He was supposed vigorously to espouse the
quarrel of the Varangians, in all the disputes between them and the
other corps; he was liberal and open-handed; gave every soldier his
due; and, bating the trifling circumstance of valour, which was not
particularly his forte, it would have been difficult for these
strangers to have demanded a leader more to their wishes. Besides this,
our friend Hereward was admitted by him into his society, attended him,
as we have seen, upon secret expeditions, and shared, therefore,
deeply, in what may be termed by an expressive, though vulgar phrase,
the sneaking kindness entertained for this new Achilles by the greater
part of his myrmidons. Their attachment might be explained, perhaps, as
a liking to their commander, as strong as could well exist with a
marvellous lack of honour and esteem. The scheme, therefore, formed by
Hereward to effect the deliverance of the Count of Paris, comprehended
as much faith to the Emperor, and his representative, the Acolyte or
Follower, as was consistent with rendering justice to the injured Frank.

In furtherance of this plan, he conducted Count Robert from the
subterranean vaults of the Blacquernal, of the intricacies of which he
was master, having been repeatedly, of late, stationed sentinel there,
for the purpose of acquiring that knowledge of which Tatius promised
himself the advantage in the ensuing conspiracy. When they were in the
open air, and at some distance from the gloomy towers of the Palace, he
bluntly asked the Count of Paris whether he knew Agelastes the
Philosopher. The other answered in the negative.

"Look you now, Sir Knight, you hurt yourself in attempting to impose
upon me," said Hereward. "You must know him; for I saw you dined with
him yesterday."

"O! with that learned old man?" said the Count. "I know nothing of him
worth owning or disguising to thee or any one. A wily person he is,
half herald and half minstrel."

"Half procurer and whole knave," subjoined the Varangian. "With the
mask of apparent good-humour he conceals his pandering to the vices of
others; with the specious jargon of philosophy, he has argued himself
out of religious belief and moral principle; and, with the appearance
of the most devoted loyalty, he will, if he is not checked in time,
either argue his too confiding master out of life and empire, or, if he
fails in this, reason his simple associates into death and misery."

"And do you know all this," said Count Robert, "and permit this man to
go unimpeached?"

"O, content you, sir," replied the Varangian; "I cannot yet form any
plot which Agelastes may not countermine; but the time will come, nay
it is already approaching, when the Emperor's attention shall be
irresistibly turned to the conduct of this man, and then let the
philosopher sit fast, or by St. Dunstan the barbarian overthrows him! I
would only fain, methinks, save from his clutches a foolish friend, who
has listed to his delusions."

"But what have I to do," said the Count, "with this man, or with his
plots?"

"Much," said Hereward, "although you know it not. The main supporter of
this plot is no other than the Caesar, who ought to be the most
faithful of men; but ever since Alexius has named a Sebastocrator, an
officer that is higher in rank, and nearer to the throne than the
Caesar himself, so long has Nicephorus Briennius been displeased and
dissatisfied, though for what length of time he has joined the schemes
of the astucious Agelastes it is more difficult to say. This I know,
that for many months he has fed liberally, as his riches enable him to
do, the vices and prodigality of the Caesar. He has encouraged him to
show disrespect to his wife, although the Emperor's daughter; has put
ill-will between him and the royal family. And if Briennius bears no
longer the fame of a rational man, and the renown of a good leader, he
is deprived of both by following the advice of this artful sycophant."

"And what is all this to me?" said, the Frank. "Agelastes may be a true
man or a time-serving slave; his master, Alexius Comnenus, is not so
much allied to me or mine that I should meddle in the intrigues of his
court."

"You may be mistaken in that," said the blunt Varangian; "if these
intrigues involve the happiness and virtue"'--

"Death of a thousand martyrs!" said the Frank, "doth paltry intrigues
and quarrels of slaves involve a single thought of suspicion of the
noble Countess of Paris? The oaths of thy whole generation were
ineffectual to prove but that one of her hairs had changed its colour
to silver!"

"Well imagined, gallant knight," said the Anglo-Saxon; "thou art a
husband fitted for the atmosphere of Constantinople, which calls for
little vigilance and a strong belief. Thou wilt find many followers and
fellows in this court of ours."

"Hark thee, friend," replied the Frank, "let us have no more words, nor
walk farther together than just to the most solitary nook of this
bewildered city, and let us there set to that work which we left even
now unfinished."

"If thou wert a Duke, Sir Count," replied the Varangian, "thou couldst
not invite to a combat one who is more ready for it. Yet consider the
odds on which we fight. If I fall, my moan is soon made; but will my
death set thy wife at liberty if she is under restraint, or restore her
honour if it is tarnished?--Will it do any thing more than remove from
the world the only person who is willing to give thee aid, at his own
risk and danger, and who hopes to unite thee to thy wife, and replace
thee at the head of thy forces?"

"I was wrong," said the Count of Paris; "I was entirely wrong; but
beware, my good friend, how thou couplest the name of Brenhilda of
Aspramonte with the word of dishonour, and tell me, instead of this
irritating discourse, whither go we now?"

"To the Cytherean gardens of Agelastes, from which we are not far
distant," said the Anglo-Saxon; "yet he hath a nearer way to it than
that by which we now travel, else I should be at a loss to account for
the short space in which he could exchange the charms of his garden for
the gloomy ruins of the Temple of Isis, and the Imperial palace of the
Blacquernal."

"And wherefore, and how long," said Count Robert, "dost thou conclude
that my Countess is detained in these gardens?"

"Ever since yesterday," replied Hereward. "When both I, and several of
my companions, at my request, kept close watch upon the Caesar and your
lady, we did plainly perceive passages of fiery admiration on his part,
and anger as it seemed on hers, which Agelastes, being Nicephorus's
friend, was likely, as usual, to bring to an end, by a separation of
you both from the army of the crusaders, that your wife, like many a
matron before, might have the pleasure of taking up her residence in
the gardens of that worthy sage; while you, my Lord, might take up your
own permanently in the castle of Blacquernal."

"Villain! why didst thou not apprize me of this yesterday?"

"A likely thing," said Hereward, "that I should feel myself at liberty
to leave the ranks, and make such a communication to a man, whom, far
from a friend, I then considered in the light of a personal enemy!
Methinks, that instead of such language as this, you should be thankful
that so many chance circumstances have at length brought me to befriend
and assist you."

Count Robert felt the truth of what was said, though at the same time
his fiery temper longed to avenge itself, according to its wont, upon
the party which was nearest at hand.

But now they arrived at what the citizens of Constantinople called the
Philosopher's Gardens. Here Hereward hoped to obtain entrance, for he
had gained a knowledge of some part, at least, of the private signals
of Achilles and Agelastes, since he had been introduced to the last at
the ruins of the Temple of Isis. They had not indeed admitted him to
their entire secret; yet, confident in his connexion with the Follower,
they had no hesitation in communicating to him snatches of knowledge,
such as, committed to a man of shrewd natural sense like the
Anglo-Saxon, could scarce fail, in time and by degrees, to make him
master of the whole. Count Robert and his companion stood before an
arched door, the only opening in a high wall, and the Anglo-Saxon was
about to knock, when, as if the idea had suddenly struck him,--

"What if the wretch Diogenes opens the gate? We must kill him, ere he
can fly back and betray us. Well, it is a matter of necessity, and the
villain has deserved his death by a hundred horrid crimes."

"Kill him then, thyself," retorted Count Robert; "he is nearer thy
degree, and assuredly I will not defile the name of Charlemagne with
the blood of a black slave."

"Nay, God-a-mercy!" answered the Anglo-Saxon, "but you must bestir
yourself in the action, supposing there come rescue, and that I be
over-borne by odds."

"Such odds," said the knight, "will render the action more like a
_melee_, or general battle; and assure yourself, I will not be slack
when I may, with my honour, be active."

"I doubt it not," said the Varangian; "but the distinction seems a
strange one, that before permitting a man to defend himself, or annoy
his enemy, requires him to demand the pedigree of his ancestor."

"Fear you not, sir," said Count Robert. "The strict rule of chivalry
indeed bears what I tell thee, but when the question is, Fight or not?
there is great allowance to be made for a decision in the affirmative."

"Let me give then the exorciser's rap," replied Hereward, "and see what
fiend will appear."

So saying, he knocked in a particular manner, and the door opened
inwards; a dwarfish negress stood in the gap--her white hair contrasted
singularly with her dark complexion, and with the broad laughing look
peculiar to those slaves. She had something in her physiognomy which,
severely construed, might argue malice, and a delight in human misery.

"Is Agelastes"---said the Varangian; but he had not completed the
sentence, when she answered him, by pointing down a shadowed walk.

The Anglo-Saxon and Frank turned in that direction, when the hag rather
muttered, than said distinctly, "You are one of the initiated,
Varangian; take heed whom you take with you, when you may hardly,
peradventure, be welcomed even going alone."

Hereward made a sign that he understood her, and they were instantly
out of her sight. The path winded beautifully through the shades of an
Eastern garden, where clumps of flowers and labyrinths of flowering
shrubs, and the tall boughs of the forest trees, rendered even the
breath of noon cool and acceptable.

"Here we must use our utmost caution," said Hereward, speaking in a low
tone of voice; "for here it is most likely the deer that we seek has
found its refuge. Better allow me to pass before, since you are too
deeply agitated to possess the coolness necessary for a scout. Keep
concealed beneath yon oak, and let no vain scruples of honour deter you
from creeping beneath the underwood, or beneath the earth itself, if
you should hear a footfall. If the lovers have agreed, Agelastes, it is
probable, walks his round, to prevent intrusion."

"Death and furies! it cannot be!" exclaimed the fiery Frank.--"Lady of
the Broken Lances, take thy votary's life, ere thou torment him with
this agony!"

He saw, however, the necessity of keeping a strong force upon himself,
and permitted, without further remonstrance, the Varangian to pursue
his way, looking, however, earnestly after him.

By advancing forward a little, he could observe Hereward draw near to a
pavilion which arose at no great distance from the place where they had
parted. Here he observed him apply, first his eye, and then his ear, to
one of the casements, which were in a great measure grown over, and
excluded from the light, by various flowering shrubs. He almost thought
he saw a grave interest take place in the countenance of the Varangian,
and he longed to have his share of the information which he had
doubtless obtained.

He crept, therefore, with noiseless steps, through the same labyrinth
of foliage which had covered the approaches of Hereward; and so silent
were his movements, that he touched the Anglo-Saxon, in order to make
him aware of his presence, before he observed his approach.

Hereward, not aware at first by whom he was approached, turned on the
intruder with a countenance like a burning coal. Seeing, however, that
it was the Frank, he shrugged his shoulders, as if pitying the
impatience which could not be kept under prudent restraint, and drawing
himself back allowed the Count the privilege of a peeping place through
plinths of the casement, which could not be discerned by the sharpest
eye from the inner side. The sombre character of the light which
penetrated into this abode of pleasure, was suited to that species of
thought to which a Temple of Cytherea was supposed to be dedicated.
Portraits and groups of statuary were also to be seen, in the taste of
those which they had beheld at the Kiosk of the waterfall, yet
something more free in the ideas which they conveyed than were to be
found at their first resting-place. Shortly after, the door of the
pavilion opened, and the Countess entered, followed by her attendant
Agatha. The lady threw herself on a couch as she came in, while her
attendant, who was a young and very handsome woman, kept herself
modestly in the background, so much so as hardly to be distinguished.

"What dost thou think," said the Countess, "of so suspicious a friend
as Agelastes? so gallant an enemy as the Caesar, as he is called?"

"What should I think," returned the damsel, "except that what the old
man calls friendship is hatred, and what the Caesar terms a patriotic
love for his country, which will not permit him to set its enemies at
liberty, is in fact too strong an affection for his fair captive?"

"For such an affection," said the Countess, "he shall have the same
requital as if it were indeed the hostility of which he would give it
the colour.--My true and noble lord; hadst thou an idea of the
calamities to which they have subjected me, how soon wouldst thou break
through every restraint to hasten to my relief!"

"Art thou a man," said Count Robert to his companion; "and canst thou
advise me to remain still and hear this?"

"I am one man," said the Anglo-Saxon; "you, sir, are another; but all
our arithmetic will not make us more than two; and in this place, it is
probable that a whistle from the Caesar, or a scream from Agelastes,
would bring a thousand to match us, if we were as bold as Bevis of
Hampton.--Stand still and keep quiet. I counsel this, less as
respecting my own life, which, by embarking upon a wild-goose chase
with so strange a partner, I have shown I put at little value, than for
thy safety, and that of the lady thy Countess, who shows herself as
virtuous as beautiful."

"I was imposed on at first," said the Lady Brenhilda to her attendant.
"Affectation of severe morals, of deep learning, and of rigid
rectitude, assumed by this wicked old man, made me believe in part the
character which he pretended; but the gloss is rubbed off since he let
me see into his alliance with the unworthy Caesar, and the ugly picture
remains in its native loathsomeness. Nevertheless, if I can, by address
or subtlety, deceive this arch-deceiver,--as he has taken from me, in a
great measure, every other kind of assistance,--I will not refuse that
of craft, which he may find perhaps equal to his own?"

"Hear you that?" said the Varangian to the Count of Paris. "Do not let
your impatience mar the web of your lady's prudence. I will weigh a
woman's wit against a man's valour where there is aught to do! Let us
not come in with our assistance until time shall show us that it is
necessary for her safety and our success."

"Amen," said the Count of Paris; "but hope not, Sir Saxon, that thy
prudence shall persuade me to leave this garden without taking full
vengeance on that unworthy Caesar, and the pretended philosopher, if
indeed he turns out to have assumed a character"---The Count was here
beginning to raise his voice, when the Saxon, without ceremony, placed
his hand on his mouth. "Thou takest a liberty," said Count Robert,
lowering however his tones.

"Ay, truly," said Hereward; "when the house is on fire, I do not stop
to ask whether the water which I pour on it be perfumed or no."

This recalled the Frank to a sense of his situation; and if not
contented with the Saxon's mode of making an apology, he was at least
silenced. A distant noise was now heard--the Countess listened, and
changed colour. "Agatha," she said, "we are like champions in the
lists, and here comes the adversary. Let us retreat into this side
apartment, and so for a while put off an encounter thus alarming." So
saying, the two females withdrew into a sort of anteroom, which opened
from the principal apartment behind the seat which Brenhilda had
occupied.

They had scarcely disappeared, when, as the stage direction has it,
enter from the other side the Caesar and Agelastes. They had perhaps
heard the last words of Brenhilda, for the Caesar repeated in a low
tone--

    "Militat omnis amans, habet et sua castra Cupido.

"What, has our fair opponent withdrawn her forces? No matter, it shows
she thinks of the warfare, though the enemy be not in sight. Well, thou
shalt not have to upbraid me this time, Agelastes, with precipitating
my amours, and depriving myself of the pleasure of pursuit. By Heavens,
I will be as regular in my progress as if in reality I bore on my
shoulders the whole load of years which make the difference between us;
for I shrewdly suspect that with thee, old man, it is that envious
churl Time that hath plucked the wings of Cupid."

"Say not so, mighty Caesar," said the old man; "it is the hand of
Prudence, which, depriving Cupid's wing of some wild feathers, leaves
him still enough to fly with an equal and steady flight."

"Thy flight, however, was less measured, Agelastes, when thou didst
collect that armoury--that magazine of Cupid's panoply, out of which
thy kindness permitted me but now to arm myself, or rather to repair my
accoutrements."

So saying, he glanced his eye over his own person, blazing with gems,
and adorned with a chain of gold, bracelets, rings, and other
ornaments, which, with a new and splendid habit, assumed since his
arrival at these Cytherean gardens, tended to set off his very handsome
figure.

"I am glad," said Agelastes, "if you have found among toys, which I now
never wear, and seldom made use of even when life was young with me,
anything which may set off your natural advantages. Remember only this
slight condition, that such of these trifles as have made part of your
wearing apparel on this distinguished day, cannot return to a meaner
owner, but must of necessity remain the property of that greatness of
which they had once formed the ornament."

"I cannot consent to this, my worthy friend," said the Caesar; "I know
thou valuest these jewels only in so far as a philosopher may value
them; that is, for nothing save the remembrances which attach to them.
This large seal-ring, for instance, was--I have heard you say--the
property of Socrates; if so, you cannot view it save with devout
thankfulness, that your own philosophy has never been tried with the
exercise of a Xantippe. These clasps released, in older times, the
lovely bosom of Phryne; and they now belong to one who could do better
homage to the beauties they concealed or discovered than could the
cynic Diogenes. These buckles, too"---

"I will spare thy ingenuity, good youth," said Agelastes, somewhat
nettled; "or rather, noble Caesar. Keep thy wit--thou wilt have ample
occasion for it."

"Fear not me," said the Caesar. "Let us proceed, since you will, to
exercise the gifts which we possess, such as they are, either natural
or bequeathed to us by our dear and respected friend. Hah!" he said,
the door opening suddenly, and the Countess almost meeting him, "our
wishes are here anticipated."

He bowed accordingly with the deepest deference to the Lady Brenhilda,
who, having made some alterations to enhance the splendour of her
attire, now moved forward from the withdrawing-room into which she had
retreated.

"Hail, noble lady," said the Caesar, "whom I have visited with the
intention of apologizing for detaining you, in some degree against your
will, in those strange regions in which yon unexpectedly find yourself."

"Not in some degree," answered the lady, "but entirely contrary to my
inclinations, which are, to be with my husband, the Count of Paris, and
the followers who have taken the cross under his banner."

"Such, doubtless, were your thoughts when you left the land of the
west," said Agelastes; "but, fair Countess, have they experienced no
change? You have left a shore streaming with human blood when the
slightest provocation occurred, and thou hast come to one whose
principal maxim is to increase the sum of human happiness by every mode
which can be invented. In the west yonder, he or she is respected most
who can best exercise their tyrannical strength in making others
miserable, while, in these more placid realms, we reserve our garlands
for the ingenious youth, or lovely lady, who can best make happy the
person whose affection is fixed upon her."

"But, reverend philosopher," said the Countess, "who labourest so
artificially in recommending the yoke of pleasure, know that you
contradict every notion which I have been taught from my infancy. In
the land where my nurture lay, so far are we from acknowledging your
doctrines, that we match not, except like the lion and the lioness,
when the male has compelled the female to acknowledge his superior
worth and valour. Such is our rule, that a damsel, even of mean degree,
would think herself heinously undermatched, if wedded to a gallant
whose fame in arms was yet unknown."

"But, noble lady," said the Caesar, "a dying man may then find room for
some faint hope. Were there but a chance that distinction in arms could
gain those affections which have been stolen, rather than fairly
conferred, how many are there who would willingly enter into the
competition where the prize is so fair! What is the enterprise too bold
to be under-taken on such a condition! And where is the individual
whose heart would not feel, that in baring his sword for the prize, he
made vow never to return it to the scabbard, without the proud boast,
What I have not yet won, I have deserved!"

"You see, lady," said Agelastes, who, apprehending that the last speech
of the Caesar had made some impression, hastened to follow it up with a
suitable observation---"You see that the fire of chivalry burns as
gallantly in the bosom of the Grecians as in that of the western
nations."

"Yes," answered Brenhilda, "and I have heard of the celebrated siege of
Troy, on which occasion a dastardly coward carried off the wife of a
brave man, shunned every proffer of encounter with the husband whom he
had wronged, and finally caused the death of his numerous brothers, the
destruction of his native city, with all the wealth which it contained,
and died himself the death of a pitiful poltroon, lamented only by his
worthless leman, to show how well the rules of chivalry were understood
by your predecessors."

"Lady, you mistake," said the Caesar; "the offences of Paris were those
of a dissolute Asiatic; the courage which avenged them was that of the
Greek Empire."

"You are learned, sir," said the lady; "but think not that I will trust
your words until you produce before me a Grecian knight, gallant enough
to look upon the armed crest of my husband without quaking."

"That, methinks, were not extremely difficult," returned the Caesar;
"if they have not flattered me, I have myself been thought equal in
battle to more dangerous men than him who has been strangely mated with
the Lady Brenhilda."

"That is soon tried," answered the Countess. "You will hardly, I think,
deny, that my husband, separated from me by some unworthy trick, is
still at thy command, and could be produced at thy pleasure. I will ask
no armour for him save what he wears, no weapon but his good sword
Tranchefer; then place him in this chamber, or any other lists equally
narrow, and if he flinch, or cry craven, or remain dead under shield,
let Brenhilda be the prize of the conqueror.--Merciful Heaven!" she
concluded, as she sunk back upon her seat, "forgive me for the crime of
even imagining such a termination, which is equal almost to doubting
thine unerring judgment!"

"Let me, however," said the Caesar, "catch up these precious words
before they fall to the ground,--Let me hope that he, to whom the
heavens shall give power and strength to conquer this highly-esteemed
Count of Paris, shall succeed him in the affections of Brenhilda; and
believe me, the sun plunges not through the sky to his resting-place,
with the same celerity that I shall hasten to the encounter."

"Now, by Heaven!" said Count Robert, in an anxious whisper to Hereward,
"it is too much to expect me to stand by and hear a contemptible Greek,
who durst not stand even the rattling farewell which Tranchefer takes
of his scabbard, brave me in my absence, and affect to make love to my
lady _par amours!_ And she, too--methinks Brenhilda allows more license
than she is wont to do to yonder chattering popinjay. By the rood! I
will spring into the apartment, front them with my personal appearance,
and confute yonder braggart in a manner he is like to remember."

"Under favour," said the Varangian, who was the only auditor of this
violent speech, "you shall be ruled by calm reason while I am with you.
When we are separated, let the devil of knight-errantry, which has such
possession of thee, take thee upon his shoulders, and carry thee full
tilt wheresoever he lists."

"Thou art a brute," said the Count, looking at him with a contempt
corresponding to the expression he made use of; "not only without
humanity, but without the sense of natural honour or natural shame. The
most despicable of animals stands not by tamely and sees another assail
his mate. The bull offers his horns to a rival--the mastiff uses his
jaws--and even the timid stag becomes furious, and gores."

"Because they are beasts," said the Varangian, "and their mistresses
also creatures without shame or reason, who are not aware of the
sanctity of a choice. But thou, too, Count, canst thou not see the
obvious purpose of this poor lady, forsaken by all the world, to keep
her faith towards thee, by eluding the snares with which wicked men
have beset her? By the souls of my fathers! my heart is so much moved
by her ingenuity, mingled as I see it is with the most perfect candour
and faith, that I myself, in fault of a better champion, would
willingly raise the axe in her behalf!"

"I thank thee, my good friend," said the Count; "I thank thee as
heartily as if it were possible thou shouldst be left to do that good
office for Brenhilda, the beloved of many a noble lord, the mistress of
many a powerful vassal; and, what is more, much more than thanks, I
crave thy pardon for the wrong I did thee but now."

"My pardon you cannot need" said the Varangian; "for I take no offence
that is not seriously meant.--Stay, they speak again."

"It is strange it should be so," said the Caesar, as he paced the
apartment; "but methinks, nay, I am almost certain, Agelastes, that I
hear voices in the vicinity of this apartment of thy privacy." "It is
impossible," said Agelastes; "but I will go and see." Perceiving him to
leave the pavilion, the Varangian made the Frank sensible that they
must crouch down among a little thicket of evergreens, where they lay
completely obscured. The philosopher made his rounds with a heavy step,
but a watchful eye; and the two listeners were obliged to observe the
strictest silence, without motion of any kind, until he had completed
an ineffectual search, and returned into the pavilion. "By my faith,
brave man," said the Count, "ere we return to our skulking-place, I
must tell thee in thine ear, that never, in my life, was temptation so
strong upon me, as that which prompted me to beat out that old
hypocrite's brains, provided I could have reconciled it with my honour;
and heartily do I wish that thou, whose honour no way withheld thee,
had experienced and given way to some impulse of a similar nature."

"Such fancies have passed through my head," said the Varangian; "but I
will not follow them till they are consistent both with our own safety,
and more particularly with that of the Countess."

"I thank thee again for thy good-will to her," said Count Robert; "and,
by Heaven! if fight we must at length, as it seems likely, I will
neither grudge thee an honourable antagonist, nor fair quarter if the
combat goes against thee."

"Thou hast my thanks," was the reply of Hereward; "only, for Heaven's
sake, be silent in this conjecture, and do what thou wilt afterwards."
Before the Varangian and the Count had again resumed their posture of
listeners, the parties within the pavilion, conceiving themselves
unwatched, had resumed their conversation, speaking low, yet with
considerable animation.

"It is in vain you would persuade me," said the Countess, "that you
know not where my husband is, or that you have not the most absolute
influence over his captivity. Who else could have an interest in
banishing or putting to death the husband, but he that affects to
admire the wife?" "You do me wrong, beautiful lady," answered the
Caesar, "and forget that I can in no shape be termed the moving-spring
of this empire; that my father-in-law, Alexius, is the Emperor; and
that the woman who terms herself my wife, is jealous as a fiend can be
of my slightest motion.-What possibility was there that I should work
the captivity of your husband and your own? The open affront which the
Count of Paris put upon the Emperor, was one which he was likely to
avenge, either by secret guile or by open force. Me it no way touched,
save as the humble vassal of thy charms; and it was by the wisdom and
the art of the sage Agelastes, that I was able to extricate thee from
the gulf in which thou hadst else certainly perished. Nay, weep not,
lady, for as yet we know not the fate of Count Robert; but, credit me,
it is wisdom to choose a better protector, and consider him as no more."

"A better than him," said Brenhilda, "I can never have, were I to
choose out of the knighthood of all the world!"

"This hand," said the Caesar, drawing himself into a martial attitude,
"should decide that question, were the man of whom thou thinkest so
much yet moving on the face of this earth and at liberty."

"Thou art," said Brenhilda, looking fixedly at him with the fire of
indignation flashing from every feature--"thou art--but it avails not
telling thee what is thy real name; believe me, the world shall one day
ring with it, and be justly sensible of its value. Observe what I am
about to say--Robert of Paris is gone--or captive, I know not where. He
cannot fight the match of which thou seemest so desirous--but here
stands Brenhilda, born heiress of Aspramonte, by marriage the wedded
wife of the good Count of Paris. She was never matched in the lists by
mortal man, except the valiant Count, and since thou art so grieved
that thou canst not meet her husband in battle, thou canst not surely
object, if she is willing to meet thee in his stead!"

"How, madam?" said the Caesar, astonished; "do you propose yourself to
hold the lists against me?"

"Against you!" said the Countess; "against all the Grecian Empire, if
they shall affirm that Robert of Paris is justly used and lawfully
confined."

"And are the conditions," said the Caesar, "the same as if Count Robert
himself held the lists? The vanquished must then be at the pleasure of
the conqueror for good or evil."

"It would seem so," said the Countess, "nor do I refuse the hazard;
only, that if the other champion shall bite the dust, the noble Count
Robert shall be set at liberty, and permitted to depart with all
suitable honours."

"This I refuse not," said the Caesar, "provided it is in my power."

A deep growling sound, like that of a modern gong, here interrupted the
conference.




CHAPTER THE NINETEENTH.


The Varangian and Count Robert, at every risk of discovery, had
remained so near as fully to conjecture, though they could not
expressly overhear, the purport of the conversation.

"He has accepted her challenge!" said the Count of Paris.

"And with apparent willingness," said Hereward.

"O, doubtless, doubtless,"--answered the Crusader; "but he knows not
the skill in war which a woman may attain; for my part, God knows I
have enough depending upon the issue of this contest, yet such is my
confidence, that I would to God I had more. I vow to our Lady of the
Broken Lances, that I desire every furrow of land I possess--every
honour which I can call my own, from the Countship of Paris, down to
the leather that binds my spur, were dependent and at issue upon this
fair field, between your Caesar, as men term him, and Brenhilda of
Aspramonte."

"It is a noble confidence," said the Varangian, "nor durst I say it is
a rash one; only I cannot but remember that the Caesar is a strong man,
as well as a handsome, expert in the use of arms, and, above all, less
strictly bound than you esteem yourself by the rules of honour. There
are many ways in which advantage may be given and taken, which will
not, in the Caesar's estimation, alter the character of the field from
an equal one, although it might do so in the opinion of the chivalrous
Count of Paris, or even in that of the poor Varangian. But first let me
conduct you to some place of safety, for your escape must be soon, if
it is not already, detected. The sounds which we heard intimate that
some of his confederate plotters have visited the garden on other than
love affairs. I will guide thee to another avenue than that by which we
entered. But you would hardly, I suppose, be pleased to adopt the
wisest alternative?"

"And what may that be?" said the Count.

"To give thy purse, though it were thine all, to some poor ferryman to
waft thee over the Hellespont, then hasten to carry thy complaint to
Godfrey of Bouillon, and what friends thou mayst have among thy
brethren crusaders, and determine, as thou easily canst, on a
sufficient number of them to come back and menace the city with instant
war, unless the Emperor should deliver up thy lady, most unfairly made
prisoner, and prevent, by his authority, this absurd and unnatural
combat."

"And would you have me, then," said Count Robert, "move the crusaders
to break a fairly appointed field of battle? Do you think that Godfrey
of Bouillon would turn back upon his pilgrimage for such an unworthy
purpose; or that the Countess of Paris would accept as a service, means
of safety which would stain her honour for ever, by breaking an
appointment solemnly made on her own challenge?--Never!"

"My judgment is then at fault," said the Varangian, "for I see I can
hammer out no expedient which is not, in some extravagant manner or
another, controlled by your foolish notions. Here is a man who has been
trapped into the power of his enemy, that he might not interfere to
prevent a base stratagem upon his lady, involving both her life and
honour; yet he thinks it a matter of necessity that he keeps faith as
precisely with these midnight poisoners, as he would had it been
pledged to the most honourable men!"

"Thou say'st a painful truth," said Count Robert; "but my word is the
emblem of my faith; and if it pass to a dishonourable or faithless foe,
it is imprudently done on my part; but if I break it, being once
pledged, it is a dishonourable action, and the disgrace can never be
washed from my shield."

"Do you mean, then," said the Varangian, "to suffer your wife's honour
to remain pledged as it at present is, on the event of an unequal
combat?"

"God and the saints pardon thee such a thought!" said the Count of
Paris. "I will go to see this combat with a heart as firm, if not as
light, as any time I ever saw spears splintered. If by the influence of
any accident or treachery,--for fairly, and with such an antagonist,
Brenhilda of Aspramonte cannot be overthrown,--I step into the lists,
proclaim the Caesar as he is--a villain--show the falsehood of his
conduct from beginning to end,--appeal to every noble heart that hears
me, and then--God show the right!"

Hereward paused, and shook his head. "All this," he said, "might be
feasible enough provided the combat were to be fought in the presence
of your own countrymen, or even, by the mass! if the Varangians were to
be guards of the lists. But treachery of every kind is so familiar to
the Greeks, that I question if they would view the conduct of their
Caesar as any thing else than a pardonable and natural stratagem of Dan
Cupid, to be smiled at, rather than subjected to disgrace or
punishment."

"A nation," said Count Robert, "who could smile at such a jest, may
heaven refuse them sympathy at their utmost need, when their sword is
broken in their hand, and their wives and daughters shrieking in the
relentless grasp of a barbarous enemy!"

Hereward looked upon his companion, whose flushed cheeks and sparkling
eyes bore witness to his enthusiasm.

"I see," he said, "you are resolved, and I know that your resolution
can in justice be called by no other name than an act of heroic folly:
--What then? it is long since life has been bitter to the Varangian
exile. Morn has raised him from a joyless bed, which night has seen him
lie down upon, wearied with wielding a mercenary weapon in the wars of
strangers. He has longed to lay down his life in an honourable cause,
and this is one in which the extremity and very essence of honour is
implicated. It tallies also with my scheme of saving the Emperor, which
will be greatly facilitated by the downfall of his ungrateful
son-in-law." Then addressing himself to the Count, he continued, "Well,
Sir Count, as thou art the person principally concerned, I am willing
to yield to thy reasoning in this affair; but I hope you will permit me
to mingle with your resolution some advices of a more everyday and less
fantastic nature. For example, thy escape from the dungeons of the
Blacquernal must soon be generally known. In prudence, indeed, I myself
must be the first to communicate it, since otherwise the suspicion will
fall on me--Where do you think of concealing yourself? for assuredly
the search will be close and general."

"For that," said the Count of Paris, "I must be indebted to thy
suggestion, with thanks for every lie which thou findest thyself
obliged to make, to contrive, and produce in my behalf, entreating thee
only to render them as few as possible, they being a coin which I
myself never fabricate."

"Sir knight," answered Hereward, "let me begin first by saying, that no
knight that ever belted sword is more a slave to truth, when truth is
observed towards him, than the poor soldier who talks to thee; but when
the game depends not upon fair play, but upon lulling men's
cautiousness asleep by falsehood, and drugging their senses by opiate
draughts, they who would scruple at no means of deceiving me, can
hardly expect that I, who am paid in such base money, should pass
nothing on my part but what is lawful and genuine. For the present thou
must remain concealed within my poor apartment, in the barracks of the
Varangians, which is the last place where they will think of seeking
for thee. Take this, my upper cloak, and follow me; and now that we are
about to leave these gardens, thou mayst follow me unsuspected as a
sentinel attending his officer; for, take it along with you, noble
Count, that we Varangians are a sort of persons upon whom the Greeks
care not to look very long or fixedly."

They now reached the gate where they had been admitted by the negress,
and Hereward, who was intrusted with the power, it seems, of letting
himself out of the philosopher's premises, though not of entering
without assistance from the portress, took out a key which turned the
lock on the garden side, so that they soon found themselves at liberty.
They then proceeded by by-paths through the city, Hereward leading the
way, and the Count following, without speech or remonstrance, until
they stood before the portal of the barracks of the Varangians.

"Make haste," said the sentinel who was on duty, "dinner is already
begun." The communication sounded joyfully in the ears of Hereward, who
was much afraid that his companion might have been stopt and examined.
By a side passage he reached his own quarters, and introduced the Count
into a small room, the sleeping chamber of his squire, where he
apologized for leaving him for some time; and, going out, locked the
door, for fear, as he said, of intrusion.

The demon of suspicion was not very likely to molest a mind so frankly
constituted as that of Count Robert, and yet the last action of
Hereward did not fail to occasion some painful reflections.

"This man," he said, "had needs be true, for I have reposed in him a
mighty trust, which few hirelings in his situation would honourably
discharge. What is to prevent him to report to the principal officer of
his watch, that the Frank prisoner, Robert, Count of Paris, whose wife
stands engaged for so desperate a combat with the Caesar, has escaped,
indeed, this morning, from the prisons of the Blacquernal, but has
suffered himself to be trepanned at noon, and is again a captive in the
barracks of the Varangian Guard?---what means of defence are mine, were
I discovered to these mercenaries?--What man could do, by the favour of
our Lady of the Broken Lances, I have not failed to achieve. I have
slain a tiger in single combat--I have killed one warder, and conquered
the desperate and gigantic creature by whom he was supported. I have
had terms enough at command to bring over this Varangian to my side, in
appearance at least; yet all this does not encourage me to hope that I
could long keep at bay ten or a dozen such men as these beef-fed knaves
appear to be, led in upon me by a fellow of thewes and sinews such as
those of my late companion.--Yet for shame, Robert! such thoughts are
unworthy a descendant of Charlemagne. When wert thou wont so curiously
to count thine enemies, and when wert thou wont to be suspicious, since
he, whose bosom may truly boast itself incapable of fraud, ought in
honesty to be the last to expect it in another? The Varangian's look is
open, his coolness in danger is striking, his speech is more frank and
ready than ever was that of a traitor. If he is false, there is no
faith in the hand of nature, for truth, sincerity, and courage are
written upon his forehead."

While Count Robert was thus reflecting upon his condition, and
combating the thick-coming doubts and suspicions which its
uncertainties gave rise to, he began to be sensible that he had not
eaten for many hours; and amidst many doubts and fears of a more heroic
nature, he half entertained a lurking suspicion, that they meant to let
hunger undermine his strength before they adventured into the apartment
to deal with him.

We shall best see how far these doubts were deserved by Hereward, or
how far they were unjust, by following his course after he left his
barrack-room. Snatching a morsel of dinner, which he ate with an
affectation of great hunger, but, in fact, that his attention to his
food might be a pretence for dispensing with disagreeable questions, or
with conversation of any kind, he pleaded duty, and immediately leaving
his comrades, directed his course to the lodgings of Achilles Tatius,
which were a part of the same building. A Syrian slave, who opened the
door, after a deep reverence to Hereward, whom he knew as a favourite
attendant of the Acolyte, said to him that his master was gone forth,
but had desired him to say, that if he wished to see him, he would find
him at the Philosopher's Gardens, so called, as belonging to the sage
Agelastes.

Hereward turned about instantly, and availing himself of his knowledge
of Constantinople to thread its streets in the shortest time possible,
at length stood alone before the door in the garden-wall, at which he
and the Count of Paris had previously been admitted in the earlier part
of the day. The same negress appeared at the same private signal, and
when he asked for Achilles Tatius, she replied, with some sharpness,
"Since you were here this morning, I marvel you did not meet him, or
that, having business with him, you did not stay till he arrived. Sure
I am, that not long after you entered the garden the Acolyte was
enquiring for you."

"It skills not, old woman" said the Varangian; "I communicate the
reason of my motions to my commander, but not to thee." He entered the
garden accordingly, and avoiding the twilight path that led to the
Bower of Love,--so was the pavilion named in which he had overheard the
dialogue between the Caesar and the Countess of Paris,--he arrived
before a simple garden-house, whose humble and modest front seemed to
announce that it was the abode of philosophy and learning. Here,
passing before the windows, he made some little noise, expecting to
attract the attention either of Achilles Tatius, or his accomplice
Agelastes, as chance should determine. It was the first who heard, and
who replied. The door opened; a lofty plume stooped itself, that its
owner might cross the threshold, and the stately form of Achilles
Tatius entered the gardens. "What now," he said, "our trusty sentinel?
what hast thou, at this time of day, come to report to us? Thou art our
good friend, and highly esteemed soldier, and well we wot thine errand
must be of importance, since thou hast brought it thyself, and at an
hour so unusual."

"Pray Heaven," said Hereward, "that the news I have brought deserve a
welcome."

"Speak them instantly," said the Acolyte, "good or bad; thou speakest
to a man to whom fear is unknown." But his eye, which quailed as he
looked on the soldier--his colour, which went and came--his hands,
which busied themselves in an uncertain manner in adjusting the belt of
his sword,--all argued a state of mind very different from that which
his tone of defiance would fain have implied. "Courage," he said, "my
trusty soldier! speak the news to me. I can bear the worst thou hast to
tell."

"In a word, then," said the Varangian, "your Valour directed me this
morning to play the office of master of the rounds upon those dungeons
of the Blacquernal palace, where last night the boisterous Count Robert
of Paris was incarcerated"--

"I remember well," said Achilles Tatius.--"What then?"

"As I reposed me," said Hereward, "in an apartment above the vaults, I
heard cries from beneath, of a kind which attracted my attention. I
hastened to examine, and my surprise was extreme, when looking down
into the dungeon, though I could see nothing distinctly, yet, by the
wailing and whimpering sounds, I conceived that the Man of the Forest,
the animal called Sylvan, whom our soldiers have so far indoctrinated
in our Saxon tongue as to make him useful in the wards of the prison,
was bemoaning himself on account of some violent injury. Descending
with a torch, I found the bed on which the prisoner had been let down
burnt to cinders; the tiger which had been chained within a spring of
it, with its skull broken to pieces; the creature called Sylvan,
prostrate, and writhing under great pain and terror, and no prisoner
whatever in the dungeon. There were marks that all the fastenings had
been withdrawn by a Mytilenian soldier, companion of my watch, when he
visited the dungeon at the usual hour; and as, in my anxious search, I
at length found his dead body, slain apparently by a stab in the
throat, I was obliged to believe that while I was examining the cell,
he, this Count Robert, with whose daring life the adventure is well
consistent, had escaped into the upper air, by means, doubtless, of the
ladder and trap-door by which I had descended."

"And wherefore didst thou not instantly call treason, and raise the hue
and cry?" demanded the Acolyte.

"I dared not venture to do so," replied the Varangian, "till I had
instructions from your Valour. The alarming cry of treason, and the
various rumours likely at this moment to ensue, might have involved a
search so close, as perchance would have discovered matters in which
the Acolyte himself would have been rendered subject to suspicion."

"Thou art right," said Achilles Tatius, in a whisper: "and yet it will
be necessary that we do not pretend any longer to conceal the flight of
this important prisoner, if we would not pass for being his
accomplices. Where thinkest thou this unhappy fugitive can have taken
refuge?"

"That I was in hopes of learning from your Valour's greater wisdom,"
said Hereward.

"Thinkest thou not," said Achilles, "that he may have crossed the
Hellespont, in order to rejoin his own countrymen and adherents?"

"It is much to be dreaded," said Hereward. "Undoubtedly, if the Count
listened to the advice of any one who knew the face of the country,
such would be the very counsel he would receive."

"The danger, then, of his return at the head of a vengeful body of
Franks," said the Acolyte, "is not so immediate as I apprehended at
first, for the Emperor gave positive orders that the boats and galleys
which yesterday transported the crusaders to the shores of Asia should
recross the strait, and bring back no single one of them from the step
upon their journey on which he had so far furthered them.--Besides,
they all,--their leaders, that is to say,--made their vows before
crossing, that they would not turn back so much as a foot's pace, now
that they had set actually forth on the road to Palestine."

"So, therefore," said Hereward, "one of the two propositions is
unquestionable; either Count Robert is on the eastern side of the
strait, having no means of returning with his brethren to avenge the
usage he has received, and may therefore be securely set, at
defiance,--or else he lurks somewhere in Constantinople, without a
friend or ally to take his part, or encourage him openly to state his
supposed wrongs; in either case, there can, I think, be no tact in
conveying to the palace the news that he has freed himself, since it
would only alarm the court, and afford the Emperor ground for many
suspicions.--But it is not for an ignorant barbarian like me to
prescribe a course of conduct to your valour and wisdom, and methinks
the sage Agelastes were a fitter counsellor than such as I am."

"No, no, no," said the Acolyte, in a hurried whisper; "the philosopher
and I are right good friends, sworn good friends, very especially bound
together; but should it come to this, that one of us must needs throw
before the footstool of the Emperor the head of the other, I think thou
wouldst not advise that I, whose hairs have not a trace of silver,
should be the last in making the offering; therefore we will say
nothing of this mishap, but give thee full power, and the highest
charge to seek for Count Robert of Paris, be he dead or alive, to
secure him within the dungeons set apart for the discipline of our own
corps, and when thou hast done so, to bring me notice. I may make him
my friend in many ways, by extricating his wife from danger by the axes
of my Varangians. What is there in this metropolis that they have to
oppose them?"

"When raised in a just cause," answered Hereward, "nothing."

"Hah!--say'st thou?" said the Acolyte; "how meanest thou by that?--but
I know--Thou art scrupulous about having the just and lawful command of
thy officer in every action in which thou art engaged, and, thinking in
that dutiful and soldierlike manner, it is my duty as thine Acolyte to
see thy scruples satisfied. A warrant shalt thou have, with full
powers, to seek for and imprison this foreign Count of whom we have
been speaking--And, hark thee, my excellent friend," he continued, with
some hesitation, "I think thou hadst better begone, and begin, or
rather continue thy search. It is unnecessary to inform our friend
Agelastes of what has happened, until his advice be more needful than
as yet it is on the occasion. Home--home to the barracks; I will
account to him for thy appearance here, if he be curious on the
subject, which, as a suspicious old man, he is likely to be. Go to the
barracks, and act as if thou hadst a warrant in every respect full and
ample. I will provide thee with one when I come back to my quarters."

The Varangian turned hastily homewards.

"Now, is it not," he said, "a strange thing, and enough to make a man a
rogue for life--to observe how the devil encourages young beginners in
falsehood! I have told a greater lie--at least I have suppressed more
truth--than on any occasion before in my whole life--and what is the
consequence? Why, my commander throws almost at my head a warrant
sufficient to guarantee and protect me in all I have done, or propose
to do! If the foul fiend were thus regular in protecting his votaries,
methinks they would have little reason to complain of him, or better
men to be astonished at their number. But a time comes, they say, when
he seldom fails to desert them. Therefore, get thee behind me, Satan!
If I have seemed to be thy servant for a short time, it is but with an
honest and Christian purpose."

As he entertained these thoughts, he looked back upon the path, and was
startled at an apparition of a creature of a much greater size, and a
stranger shape than human, covered, all but the face, with a reddish
dun fur; his expression an ugly, and yet a sad melancholy; a cloth was
wrapped round one hand, and an air of pain and languor bespoke
suffering from a wound. So much was Hereward pre-occupied with his own
reflections, that at first he thought his imagination had actually
raised the devil; but after a sudden start of surprise, he recognised
his acquaintance Sylvan. "Hah! old friend," he said, "I am happy thou
hast made thy escape to a place where them wilt find plenty of fruit to
support thee. Take my advice--keep out of the way of discovery--Keep
thy friend's counsel."

The Man of the Wood uttered a chattering noise in return to this
address.

"I understand thee," said Hereward, "thou wilt tell no tales, thou
sayest; and faith, I will trust thee rather than the better part of my
own two-legged race, who are eternally circumventing or murdering each
other."

A minute after the creature was out of sight, Hereward heard the shriek
of a female, and a voice which cried for help. The accents must have
been uncommonly interesting to the Varangian, since, forgetting his own
dangerous situation, he immediately turned and flew to the suppliant's
assistance.




CHAPTER THE TWENTIETH.

     She comes! she comes! in all the charms of youth,
     Unequall'd love, and unsuspected truth!


Hereward was not long in tracing the cry through the wooded walks, when
a female rushed into his arms; alarmed, as it appeared, by Sylvan, who
was pursuing her closely. The figure of Hereward, with his axe
uplifted, put an instant stop to his career, and with a terrified note
of his native cries, he withdrew into the thickest of the adjoining
foliage.

Relieved from his presence, Hereward had time to look at the female
whom he had succoured: She was arrayed in a dress which consisted of
several colours, that which predominated being a pale yellow; her tunic
was of this colour, and, like a modern gown, was closely fitted to the
body, which, in the present case, was that of a tall, but very
well-formed person. The mantle, or upper garment, in which the whole
figure was wrapped, was of fine cloth; and the kind of hood which was
attached to it having flown back with the rapidity of her motion, gave
to view the hair beautifully adorned and twisted into a natural
head-dress. Beneath this natural head-gear appeared a face pale as
death, from a sense of the supposed danger, but which preserved, even
amidst its terrors, an exquisite degree of beauty.

Hereward was thunderstruck at this apparition. The dress was neither
Grecian, Italian, nor of the costume of the Franks;--it was
_Saxon!_--connected by a thousand tender remembrances with Hereward's
childhood and youth. The circumstance was most extraordinary. Saxon
women, indeed, there were in Constantinople, who had united their
fortunes with those of the Varangians; and those often chose to wear
their national dress in the city, because the character and conduct of
their husbands secured them a degree of respect, which they might not
have met with either as Grecian or as stranger females of a similar
rank. But almost all these were personally known to Hereward. It was no
time, however, for reverie--he was himself in danger---the situation of
the young female might be no safe one. In every case, it was judicious
to quit the more public part of the gardens; he therefore lost not a
moment in conveying the fainting Saxon to a retreat he fortunately was
acquainted with. A covered path, obscured by vegetation, led through a
species of labyrinth to an artificial cave, at the bottom of which,
half-paved with shells, moss, and spar, lay the gigantic and
half-recumbent statue of a river deity, with its usual attributes--that
is, its front crowned with water-lilies and sedges, and its ample hand
half-resting upon an empty urn. The attitude of the whole figure
corresponded with the motto,--"I SLEEP--AWAKE ME NOT."

"Accursed relic of paganism," said Hereward, who was, in proportion to
his light, a zealous Christian--"brutish stock or stone that thou art!
I will wake thee with a vengeance." So saying, he struck the head of
the slumbering deity with his battle-axe, and deranged the play of the
fountain so much that the water began to pour into the basin.

"Thou art a good block, nevertheless," said the Varangian, "to send
succour so needful to the aid of my poor countrywoman. Thou shalt give
her also, with thy leave, a portion of thy couch." So saying he
arranged his fair burden, who was as yet insensible, upon the pedestal
where the figure of the River God reclined. In doing this, his
attention was recalled to her face, and again and again he was thrilled
with an emotion of hope, but so excessively like fear, that it could
only be compared to the flickering of a torch, uncertain whether it is
to light up or be instantly extinguished. With a sort of mechanical
attention, he continued to make such efforts as he could to recall the
intellect of the beautiful creature before him. His feelings were those
of the astronomical sage, to whom the rise of the moon slowly restores
the contemplation of that heaven, which is at once, as a Christian, his
hope of felicity, and, as a philosopher, the source of his knowledge.
The blood returned to her cheek, and reanimation, and even
recollection, took place in her earlier than in the astonished
Varangian.

"Blessed Mary!" she said, "have I indeed tasted the last bitter cup,
and is it here where thou reunitest thy votaries after death!--Speak,
Hereward! if thou art aught but an empty creature of the
imagination!--speak, and tell me, if I have but dreamed of that
monstrous ogre!"

"Collect thyself, my beloved Bertha," said the Anglo-Saxon, recalled by
the sound of her voice, "and prepare to endure what thou livest to
witness, and thy Hereward survives to tell. That hideous thing
exists--nay, do not start, and look for a hiding-place--thy own gentle
hand with a riding rod is sufficient to tame its courage. And am I not
here, Bertha? Wouldst thou wish another safeguard?"

"No--no," exclaimed she, seizing on the arm of her recovered lover. "Do
I not know you now?"

"And is it but now you know me, Bertha?" said Hereward.

"I suspected before," she said, casting down her eyes; "but I know with
certainty that mark of the boar's tusk."

Hereward suffered her imagination to clear itself from the shock it had
received so suddenly, before he ventured to enter upon present events,
in which there was so much both to doubt and to fear. He permitted her,
therefore, to recall to her memory all the circumstances of the rousing
the hideous animal, assisted by the tribes of both their fathers. She
mentioned in broken words the flight of arrows discharged against the
boar by young and old, male and female, and how her own well aimed, but
feeble shaft, wounded him sharply; she forgot not how, incensed at the
pain, the creature rushed upon her as the cause, laid her palfrey dead
upon the spot, and would soon have slain her, had not Hereward, when
every attempt failed to bring his horse up to the monster, thrown
himself from his seat, and interposed personally between the boar and
Bertha. The battle was not decided without a desperate struggle; the
boar was slain, but Hereward received the deep gash upon his brow which
she whom he had saved how recalled to her memory. "Alas!" she said,
"what have we been to each other since that period? and what are we
now, in this foreign land?"

"Answer for thyself, my Bertha," said the Varangian, "if thou
canst;--and if thou canst with truth say that thou art the same Bertha
who vowed affection to Hereward, believe me, it were sinful to suppose
that the saints have brought us together with a view of our being
afterwards separated."

"Hereward," said Bertha, "you have not preserved the bird in your bosom
safer than I have; at home or abroad, in servitude or in freedom,
amidst sorrow or joy, plenty or want, my thought was always on the
troth I had plighted to Hereward at the stone of Odin."

"Say no more of that," said Hereward; "it was an impious rite, and good
could not come of it."

"Was it then so impious?" she said, the unbidden tear rushing into her
large blue eyes.--"Alas! it was a pleasure to reflect that Hereward was
mine by that solemn engagement!"

"Listen to me, my Bertha," said Hereward, taking her hand: "We were
then almost children; and though our vow was in itself innocent, yet it
was so far wrong, as being sworn in the presence of a dumb idol,
representing one who was, while alive, a bloody and cruel magician. But
we will, the instant an opportunity offers itself, renew our vow before
a shrine of real sanctity, and promise suitable penance for our
ignorant acknowledgment of Odin, to propitiate the real Deity, who can
bear us through those storms of adversity which are like to surround
us."

Leaving them for the time to their love-discourse, of a nature pure,
simple, and interesting, we shall give, in a few words, all that the
reader needs to know of their separate history between the boar's hunt
and the time of their meeting in the gardens of Agelastes.

In that doubtful state experienced by outlaws, Waltheoff, the father of
Hereward, and Engelred, the parent of Bertha, used to assemble their
unsubdued tribes, sometimes in the fertile regions of Devonshire,
sometimes in the dark wooded solitudes of Hampshire, but as much as
possible within the call of the bugle of the famous Edric the Forester,
so long leader of the insurgent Saxons. The chiefs we have mentioned
were among the last bold men who asserted the independence of the Saxon
race of England; and like their captain Edric, they were generally
known by the name of Foresters, as men who lived by hunting, when their
power of making excursions was checked and repelled. Hence they made a
step backwards in civilization, and became more like to their remote
ancestors of German descent, than they were to their more immediate and
civilized predecessors, who before the battle of Hastings, had advanced
considerably in the arts of civilized life.

Old superstitions had begun to revive among them, and hence the
practice of youths and maidens plighting their troth at the stone
circles dedicated, as it was supposed, to Odin, in whom, however, they
had long ceased to nourish any of the sincere belief which was
entertained by their heathen ancestors.

In another respect these outlaws were fast resuming a striking
peculiarity of the ancient Germans. Their circumstances naturally
brought the youth of both sexes much together, and by early marriage,
or less permanent connexions, the population would have increased far
beyond the means which the outlaws had to maintain, or even to protect
themselves. The laws of the Foresters, therefore, strictly enjoined
that marriages should be prohibited until the bridegroom was twenty-one
years complete. Future alliances were indeed often formed by the young
people, nor was this discountenanced by their parents, provided that
the lovers waited until the period when the majority of the bridegroom
should permit them to marry. Such youths as infringed this rule,
incurred the dishonourable epithet of _niddering_, or worthless,--an
epithet of a nature so insulting, that men were known to have slain
themselves, rather than endure life under such opprobrium. But the
offenders were very few amidst a race trained in moderation and
self-denial; and hence it was that woman, worshipped for so many years
like something sacred, was received, when she became the head of a
family, into the arms and heart of a husband who had so long expected
her, was treated as something more elevated than the mere idol of the
moment; and feeling the rate at which she was valued, endeavoured by
her actions to make her life correspond with it.

It was by the whole population of these tribes, as well as their
parents, that after the adventure of the boar hunt, Hereward and Bertha
were considered as lovers whose alliance was pointed out by Heaven, and
they were encouraged to approximate as much as their mutual
inclinations prompted them. The youths of the tribe avoided asking
Martha's hand at the dance, and the maidens used no maidenly entreaty
or artifice to detain Hereward beside them, if Bertha was present at
the feast. They clasped each other's hands through the perforated
stone, which they called the altar of Odin, though later ages have
ascribed it to the Druids, and they implored that if they broke their
faith to each other, their fault might be avenged by the twelve swords
which were now drawn around them during the ceremony by as many youths,
and that their misfortunes might be so many as twelve maidens, who
stood around with their hair loosened, should be unable to recount,
either in prose or verse.

The torch of the Saxon Cupid shone for some years as brilliant as when
it was first lighted. The time, however, came when they were to be
tried by adversity, though undeserved by the perfidy of either. Years
had gone past, and Hereward had to count with anxiety how many months
and weeks were to separate him from the bride, who was beginning
already by degrees to shrink less shyly from the expressions and
caresses of one who was soon to term her all his own. William Rufus,
however, had formed a plan of totally extirpating the Foresters, whose
implacable hatred, and restless love of freedom, had so often disturbed
the quiet of his kingdom, and despised his forest laws. He assembled
his Norman forces, and united to them a body of Saxons who had
submitted to his rule. He thus brought an overpowering force upon the
bands of Waltheoff and Engelred, who found no resource but to throw the
females of their tribe, and such as could, not bear arms, into a
convent dedicated to St. Augustin, of which Kenelm their relation was
prior, and then turning to the battle, vindicated their ancient valour
by fighting it to the last. Both the unfortunate chiefs remained dead
on the field, and Hereward and his brother had wellnigh shared their
fate; but some Saxon inhabitants of the neighbourhood, who adventured
on the field of battle, which the victors had left bare of every thing
save the booty of the kites and the ravens, found the bodies of the
youths still retaining life. As they were generally well known and much
beloved by these people, Hereward and his brother were taken care of
till their wounds began to close, and their strength returned. Hereward
then heard the doleful news of the death of his father and Engelred.
His next enquiry was concerning his betrothed bride and her mother. The
poor inhabitants could give him little information. Some of the females
who had taken refuge in the convent, the Norman knights and nobles had
seized upon as their slaves, and the rest, with the monks who had
harboured them, were turned adrift, and their place of retreat was
completely sacked and burnt to the ground.

Half-dead himself at hearing these tidings, Hereward sallied out, and
at every risk of death, for the Saxon Foresters were treated as
outlaws, commenced enquiries after those so dear to him. He asked
concerning the particular fate of Bertha and her mother, among the
miserable creatures who yet hovered about the neighbourhood of the
convent, like a few half-scorched bees about their smothered hive. But,
in the magnitude of their own terrors, none had retained eyes for their
neighbours, and all that they could say was, that the wife and daughter
of Engelred were certainly lost; and their imaginations suggested so
many heart-rending details to this conclusion, that Hereward gave up
all thoughts of further researches, likely to terminate so uselessly
and so horribly.

The young Saxon had been all his life bred up in a patriotic hatred to
the Normans, who did not, it was likely, become dearer to his thoughts
in consequence of this victory. He dreamed at first of crossing the
strait, to make war against the hated enemy in their own country; but
an idea so extravagant did not long retain possession of his mind. His
fate was decided by his encountering an aged palmer, who knew or
pretended to have known, his father, and to be a native of England.
This man was a disguised Varangian, selected for the purpose, possessed
of art and dexterity, and well provided with money. He had little
difficulty in persuading Hereward, in the hopeless desolation of his
condition, to join the Varangian Guard, at this moment at war with the
Normans, under which name it suited Hereward's prepossessions to
represent the Emperor's wars with Robert Guiscard, his son Bohemond,
and other adventurers, in Italy, Greece, or Sicily. A journey to the
East also inferred a pilgrimage, and gave the unfortunate Hereward the
chance of purchasing pardon for his sins by visiting the Holy Land. In
gaining Hereward, the recruiter also secured the services of his elder
brother, who had vowed not to separate from him.

The high character of both brothers for courage, induced this wily
agent to consider them as a great prize, and it was from the memoranda
respecting the history and character of those whom he recruited, in
which the elder had been unreservedly communicative, that Agelastes
picked up the information respecting Hereward's family and
circumstances, which, at their first secret interview, he made use of
to impress upon the Varangian the idea of his supernatural knowledge.
Several of his companions in arms were thus gained over; for it will
easily be guessed, that these memorials were intrusted to the keeping
of Achilles Tatius, and he, to further their joint purposes, imparted
them to Agelastes, who thus obtained a general credit for supernatural
knowledge among these ignorant men. But Hereward's blunt faith and
honesty enabled him to shun the snare.

Such being the fortunes of Hereward, those of Bertha formed the subject
of a broken and passionate communication between the lovers, broken
like an April day, and mingled with many a tender caress, such as
modesty permits to lovers when they meet again unexpectedly after a
separation, which threatened to be eternal. But the story may be
comprehended in few words. Amid the general sack of the monastery, an
old Norman knight seized upon Bertha as his prize. Struck with her
beauty, he designed her as an attendant upon his daughter, just then
come out of the years of childhood, and the very apple of her father's
eye, being the only child of his beloved Countess, and sent late in
life to bless their marriage-bed. It was in the order of things that
the lady of Aspramonte, who was considerably younger than the knight,
should govern her husband, and that Brenhilda, their daughter, should
govern both her parents.

The Knight of Aspramonte, however, it may be observed, entertained some
desire to direct his young offspring to more feminine amusements than
those which began already to put her life frequently in danger.
Contradiction was not to be thought of, as the good old knight knew by
experience. The influence and example of a companion a little older
than herself might be of some avail, and it was with this view that, in
the confusion of the sack, Aspramonte seized upon the youthful Bertha.
Terrified to the utmost degree, she clung to her mother, and the Knight
of Aspramonte, who had a softer heart than was then usually found under
a steel cuirass, moved by the affliction of the mother and daughter,
and recollecting that the former might also be a useful attendant upon
his lady, extended his protection to both, and conveying them out of
the press, paid the soldiers who ventured to dispute the spoil with
him, partly in some small pieces of money, and partly in dry blows with
the reverse of his lance.

The well-natured knight soon after returned to his own castle, and
being a man of an orderly life and virtuous habits, the charming
beauties of the Saxon virgin, and the more ripened charms of her
mother, did not prevent their travelling in all honour as well as
safety to his family fortress, the castle of Aspramonte. Here such
masters as could be procured were got together to teach the young
Bertha every sort of female accomplishment, In the hope that her
mistress, Brenhilda, might be inspired with a desire to partake in her
education; but although this so far succeeded, that the Saxon captive
became highly skilled in such music, needle-work, and other female
accomplishments as were known to the time, yet her young mistress,
Brenhilda, retained the taste for those martial amusements which had so
sensibly grieved her father, but to which her mother, who herself had
nourished such fancies in her youth, readily gave sanction.

The captives, however, were kindly treated. Brenhilda became infinitely
attached to the young Anglo-Saxon, whom she loved less for her
ingenuity in arts, than for her activity in field sports, to which her
early state of independence had trained her.

The Lady of Aspramonte was also kind to both the captives; but, in one
particular, she exercised a piece of petty tyranny over them. She had
imbibed an idea, strengthened by an old doting father-confessor, that
the Saxons were heathens at that time, or at least heretics, and made a
positive point with her husband that the bondswoman and girl who were
to attend on her person and that of her daughter, should be qualified
for the office by being anew admitted into the Christian Church by
baptism.

Though feeling the falsehood and injustice of the accusation, the
mother had sense enough to submit to necessity, and received the name
of Martha in all form at the altar, to which she answered during the
rest of her life.

But Bertha showed a character upon this occasion inconsistent with the
general docility and gentleness of her temper. She boldly refused to be
admitted anew into the pale of the Church, of which her conscience told
her she was already a member, or to exchange for another the name
originally given her at the font. It was in vain that the old knight
commanded, that the lady threatened, and that her mother advised and
entreated. More closely pressed in private by her mother, she let her
motive be known, which had not before been suspected. "I know," she
said, with a flood of tears, "that my father would have died ere I was
subjected to this insult; and then--who shall assure me that vows which
were made to the Saxon Bertha, will be binding if a French Agatha be
substituted in her stead? They may banish me," she said, "or kill me if
they will, but if the son of Waltheoff should again meet with the
daughter of Engelred, he shall meet that Bertha whom he knew in the
forests of Hampton."

All argument was in vain; the Saxon maiden remained obstinate, and to
try to break her resolution, the Lady of Aspramonte at length spoke of
dismissing her from the service of her young mistress, and banishing
her from the castle. To this also she had made up her mind, and she
answered firmly though respectfully, that she would sorrow bitterly at
parting with her young lady; but as to the rest, she would rather beg
under her own name, than be recreant to the faith of her fathers and
condemn it as heresy, by assigning one of Frank origin. The Lady
Brenhilda, in the meantime, entered the chamber, where her mother was
just about to pass the threatened doom of banishment.--"Do not stop for
my entrance, madam," said the dauntless young lady; "I am as much
concerned in the doom which you are about to pass as is Bertha; If she
crosses the drawbridge of Aspramonte as an exile, so will I, when she
has dried her tears, of which even my petulance could never wring one
from her eyes. She shall be my squire and body attendant, and
Launcelot, the bard, shall follow with my spear and shield."

"And you will return, mistress," said her mother, "from so foolish an
expedition, before the sun sets?"

"So heaven further me in my purpose, lady," answered the young heiress,
"the sun shall neither rise nor set that sees us return, till this name
of Bertha, and of her mistress, Brenhilda, are wafted as far as the
trumpet of fame can sound them.--Cheer up, my sweetest Bertha!" she
said, taking her attendant by the hand, "If heaven hath torn thee from
thy country and thy plighted troth, it hath given thee a sister and a
friend, with whom thy fame shall be forever blended."

The Lady of Aspramonte was confounded: She knew that her daughter was
perfectly capable of the wild course which she had announced, and that
she herself, even with her husband's assistance, would be unable to
prevent her following it. She passively listened, therefore, while the
Saxon matron, formerly Urica, but now Martha, addressed her daughter.
"My child," she said, "as you value honour, virtue, safety, and
gratitude, soften your heart towards your master and mistress, and
follow the advice of a parent, who has more years and more judgment
than you. And you, my dearest young lady, let not your lady-mother
think that an attachment to the exercises you excel in, has destroyed
in your bosom filial affection, and a regard to the delicacy of your
sex!--As they seem both obstinate, madam," continued the matron, after
watching the influence of this advice upon the young woman, "perhaps,
if it may be permitted me. I could state an alternative, which might,
in the meanwhile, satisfy your ladyship's wishes, accommodate itself to
the wilfulness of my obstinate daughter, and answer the kind purpose of
her generous mistress." The Lady of Aspramonte signed to the Saxon
matron to proceed. She went on accordingly: "The Saxons, dearest lady,
of the present day, are neither pagans nor heretics; they are, in the
time of keeping Easter, as well as in all other disputable doctrine,
humbly obedient to the Pope of Rome; and this our good Bishop well
knows, since he upbraided some of the domestics for calling me an old
heathen. Yet our names are uncouth in the ears of the Franks, and bear,
perhaps, a heathenish sound. If it be not exacted that my daughter
submit to a new rite of baptism, she will lay aside her Saxon name of
Bertha upon all occasions while in your honourable household. This will
cut short a debate which, with forgiveness, I think is scarce of
importance enough to break the peace of this castle. I will engage
that, in gratitude for this indulgence of a trifling scruple, my
daughter, if possible, shall double the zeal and assiduity of her
service to her young lady."

The Lady of Aspramonte was glad to embrace the means which this offer
presented, of extricating herself from the dispute with as little
compromise of dignity as could well be. "If the good Lord Bishop
approved of such a compromise," she said, "she would for herself
withdraw her opposition." The prelate approved accordingly, the more
readily that he was informed that the young heiress desired earnestly
such an agreement. The peace of the castle was restored, and Bertha
recognized her new name of Agatha as a name of service, but not a name
of baptism.

One effect the dispute certainly produced, and that was, increasing in
an enthusiastic degree the love of Bertha for her young mistress. With
that amiable failing of attached domestics and humble friends, she
endeavoured to serve her as she knew she loved to be served; and
therefore indulged, her mistress in those chivalrous fancies which
distinguished her even in her own age, and in ours would have rendered
her a female Quixote. Bertha, indeed, never caught the frenzy of her
mistress; but, strong, willing, and able-bodied, she readily qualified
herself to act upon occasion as a squire of the body to a Lady
Adventuress; and, accustomed from her childhood to see blows dealt,
blood flowing, and men dying, she could look with an undazzled eye upon
the dangers which her mistress encountered, and seldom teased her with
remonstrances, unless when those were unusually great. This compliance
on most occasions, gave Bertha a right of advice upon some, which,
always given with the best intentions and at fitting times,
strengthened her influence with her mistress, which a course of conduct
savouring of diametrical opposition would certainly have destroyed.

A few more words serve to announce the death of the Knight of
Aspramonte--the romantic marriage of the young lady with the Count of
Paris--their engagement in the crusade--and the detail of events with
which the reader is acquainted.

Hereward did not exactly comprehend some of the later incidents of the
story, owing to a slight strife which arose between Bertha and him
during the course of her narrative. When she avowed the girlish
simplicity with which she obstinately refused to change her name,
because, in her apprehension, the troth-plight betwixt her and her
lover might be thereby prejudiced, it was impossible for Hereward not
to acknowledge her tenderness, by snatching her to his bosom, and
impressing his grateful thanks upon her lips. She extricated herself
immediately from his grasp, however, with cheeks more crimsoned in
modesty than in anger, and gravely addressed her lover thus: "Enough,
enough, Hereward! this may be pardoned to so unexpected a meeting; but
we must in future remember, that we are probably the last of our race;
and let it not be said, that the manners of their ancestors were
forgotten by Hereward and by Bertha; think, that though we are alone,
the shades of our fathers are not far off, and watch to see what use we
make of the meeting, which, perhaps, their intercession has procured
us."

"You wrong me, Bertha," said Hereward, "if you think me capable of
forgetting my own duty and yours, at a moment when our thanks are due
to Heaven, to be testified very differently than by infringing on its
behests, or the commands of our parents. The question is now, How we
shall rejoin each other when we separate? since separate, I fear, we
must."

"O! do not say so!" exclaimed the unfortunate Bertha.

"It must be so," said Hereward, "for a time; but I swear to thee by the
hilt of my sword, and the handle of my battle-axe, that blade was never
so true to shaft as I will be to thee!"

"But wherefore, then, leave me, Hereward?" said the maiden; "and oh!
wherefore not assist me in the release of my mistress?"

"Of thy mistress!" said Hereward. "Shame! that thou canst give that
name to mortal woman!"

"But she _is_ my mistress," answered Bertha, "and by a thousand kind
ties which cannot be separated so long as gratitude is the reward of
kindness."

"And what is her danger," said Hereward; "what is it she wants, this
accomplished lady whom thou callest mistress?"

"Her honour, her life, are alike in danger," said Bertha. "She has
agreed to meet the Caesar in the field, and he will not hesitate, like
a baseborn miscreant, to take every advantage in the encounter, which,
I grieve to say, may in all likelihood be fatal to my mistress."

"Why dost thou think so?" answered Hereward. "This lady has won many
single combats, unless she is belied, against adversaries more
formidable than the Caesar."

"True," said the Saxon maiden; "but you speak of things that passed in
a far different land, where faith and honour are not empty sounds; as,
alas! they seem but too surely to be here. Trust me, it is no girlish
terror which sends me out in this disguise of my country dress, which,
they say, finds respect at Constantinople: I go to let the chiefs of
the Crusade know the peril in which the noble lady stands, and trust to
their humanity, to their religion, to their love of honour, and fear of
disgrace, for assistance in this hour of need; and now that I have had
the blessing of meeting with thee, all besides will go well--all will
go well--and I will back to my mistress and report whom I have seen."

"Tarry yet another moment, my recovered treasure!" said Hereward, "and
let me balance this matter carefully. This Frankish lady holds the
Saxons like the very dust that thou brushest from the hem of her
garment. She treats--she regards--the Saxons as pagans and heretics.
She has dared to impose slavish tasks upon thee, born in freedom. Her
father's sword has been embrued to the hilt with Anglo-Saxon
blood--perhaps that of Waltheoff and Engelred has added death to the
stain! She has been, besides, a presumptuous fool, usurping for herself
the trophies and warlike character which belong to the other sex.
Lastly, it will be hard to find a champion to fight in her stead, since
all the crusaders have passed over to Asia, which is the land, they
say, in which they have come to war; and by orders of the Emperor, no
means of return to the hither shore will be permitted to any of them."

"Alas! alas!" said Bertha, "how does this world change us! The son of
Waltheoff I once knew brave, ready to assist distress, bold and
generous. Such was what I pictured him to myself during his absence. I
have met him again, and he is calculating, cold, and selfish!"

"Hush, damsel," said the Varangian, "and know him of whom thou
speakest, ere thou judgest him. The Countess of Paris is such as I have
said; yet let her appear boldly in the lists, and when the trumpet
shall sound thrice, another shall reply, which shall announce the
arrival of her own noble lord to do battle in her stead; or should he
fail to appear--I will requite her kindness to thee, Bertha, and be
ready in his place."

"Wilt thou? wilt thou indeed?" said the damsel; "that was spoken like
the son of Waltheoff--like the genuine stock! I will home, and comfort
my mistress; for surely if the judgment of God ever directed the issue
of a judicial combat, its influence will descend upon this. But you
hint that the Count is here--that he is at liberty--she will enquire
about that."

"She must be satisfied," replied Hereward, "to know that her husband is
under the guidance of a friend, who will endeavour to protect him from
his own extravagances and follies; or, at all events, of one who, if he
cannot properly be called a friend, has certainly not acted, and will
not act, towards him the part of an enemy.--And now, farewell, long
lost--long loved!"--Before he could say more, the Saxon maiden, after
two or three vain attempts to express her gratitude, threw herself into
her lover's arms, and despite the coyness which she had recently shown,
impressed upon his lips the thanks which she could not speak.

They parted, Bertha returning to her mistress at the lodge, which she
had left both with trouble and danger, and Hereward by the portal kept
by the negro-portress, who, complimenting the handsome Varangian on his
success among the fair, intimated, that she had been in some sort a
witness of his meeting with the Saxon damsel. A piece of gold, part of
a late largesse, amply served to bribe her tongue; and the soldier,
clear of the gardens of the philosopher, sped back as he might to the
barrack--judging that it was full time to carry some supply to Count
Robert, who had been left without food the whole day.

It is a common popular saying, that as the sensation of hunger is not
connected with any pleasing or gentle emotion, so it is particularly
remarkable for irritating those of anger and spleen. It is not,
therefore, very surprising that Count Robert, who had been so unusually
long without sustenance, should receive Hereward with a degree of
impatience beyond what the occasion merited, and injurious certainly to
the honest Varangian, who had repeatedly exposed his life that day for
the interest of the Countess and the Count himself.

"Soh, sir!" he said, in that accent of affected restraint by which a
superior modifies his displeasure against his inferior into a cold and
scornful expression--"You have played a liberal host to us!--Not that
it is of consequence; but methinks a Count of the most Christian
kingdom dines not every day with a mercenary soldier, and might expect,
if not the ostentatious, at least the needful part of hospitality."

"And methinks," replied the Varangian, "O most Christian Count, that
such of your high rank as, by choice or fate, become the guests of such
as I, may think themselves pleased, and blame not their host's
niggardliness, but the difficulty of his circumstances, if dinner
should not present itself oftener than once in four-and-twenty hours."
So saying, he clapt his hands together, and his domestic Edric entered.
His guest looked astonished at the entrance of this third party into
their retirement. "I will answer for this man," said Hereward, and
addressed him in the following words:--"What food hast thou, Edric, to
place before the honourable Count?"

"Nothing but the cold pasty," replied the attendant, "marvellously
damaged by your honour's encounter at breakfast."

The military domestic, as intimated, brought forward a large pasty, but
which had already that morning sustained a furious attack, insomuch,
that Count Robert of Paris, who, like all noble Normans, was somewhat
nice and delicate in his eating, was in some doubt whether his
scrupulousness should not prevail over his hunger; but on looking more
closely, sight, smell, and a fast of twenty hours, joined to convince
him that the pasty was an excellent one, and that the charger on which
it was presented possessed corners yet untouched. At length, having
suppressed his scruples, and made bold inroad upon the remains of the
dish, he paused to partake of a flask of strong red wine which stood
invitingly beside him, and a lusty draught increased the good-humour
which had begun to take place towards Hereward, in exchange for the
displeasure with which he had received him.

"Now, by heaven!" he said, "I myself ought to be ashamed to lack the
courtesy which I recommend to others! Here have I, with the manners of
a Flemish boor, been devouring the provisions of my gallant host,
without even asking him to sit down at his own table, and to partake of
his own good cheer!"

"I will not strain courtesies with you for that," said Hereward; and
thrusting his hand into the pasty, he proceeded with great speed and
dexterity to devour the miscellaneous contents, a handful of which was
enclosed in his grasp. The Count now withdrew from the table, partly in
disgust at the rustic proceedings of Hereward, who, however, by now
calling Edric to join him in his attack upon the pasty, showed that he
had, in fact, according to his manners, subjected himself previously to
some observance of respect towards his guest; while the assistance of
his attendant enabled him to make a clear cacaabulum of what was left.
Count Robert at length summoned up courage sufficient to put a
question, which had been trembling upon his lips ever since Hereward
had returned.

"Have thine enquiries, my gallant friend, learned more concerning my
unfortunate wife, my faithful Brenhilda?"

"Tidings I have," said the Anglo-Saxon, "but whether pleasing or not,
yourself must be the judge. This much I have learned;--she hath, as you
know, come under an engagement to meet the Caesar in arms in the lists,
but under conditions which you may perhaps think strange; these,
however, she hath entertained without scruple."

"Let me know these terms,", said the Count of Paris; "they will, I
think, appear less strange in my eyes than in thine."

But while he affected to speak with the utmost coolness, the husband's
sparkling eye and crimsoned cheek betrayed the alteration which had
taken place in his feelings. "The lady and the Caesar," said Hereward,
"as you partly heard yourself, are to meet in fight; if the Countess
wins, of course she remains the wife of the noble Count of Paris; if
she loses, she becomes the paramour of the Caesar Nicephorus Briennius."

"Saints and angels forbid!" said Count Robert; "were they to permit
such treason to triumph, we might be pardoned for doubting their
divinity!"

"Yet methinks," said the Anglo-Saxon, "it were no disgraceful
precaution that both you and I, with other friends, if we can obtain
such, should be seen under shield in the lists on the morning of the
conflict. To triumph, or to be defeated, is in the hand of fate; but
what we cannot fail to witness is, whether or not the lady receives
that fair play which is the due of an honourable combatant, and which,
as you have yourself seen, can be sometimes basely transgressed in this
Grecian empire."

"On that condition," said the Count, "and protesting, that not even the
extreme danger of my lady shall make me break through the rule of a
fair fight, I will surely attend the lists, if thou, brave Saxon, canst
find me any means of doing so.--Yet stay," he continued, after
reflecting for a moment, "thou shalt promise not to let her know that
her Count is on the field, far less to point him out to her eye among
the press of warriors. O, thou dost not know that the sight of the
beloved will sometimes steal from us our courage, even when it has most
to achieve!"

"We will endeavour," said the Varangian, "to arrange matters according
to thy pleasure, so that thou findest out no more fantastical
difficulties; for, by my word, an affair so complicated in itself,
requires not to be confused by the fine-spun whims of thy national
gallantry. Meantime, much must be done this night; and while I go about
it, thou, Sir Knight, hadst best remain here, with such disguise of
garments, and such food, as Edric may be able to procure for thee. Fear
nothing from intrusion on the part of thy neighbours. We Varangians
respect each other's secrets, of whatever nature they may chance to be."




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FIRST.

     But for our trusty brother-in-law-and the Abbot,
     With all the rest of that consorted crew,--
     Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels:--
     Good uncle, help to order several powers
     To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are:
     They shall not live within this world, I swear.
                                             RICHARD II.


As Hereward spoke the last words narrated in the foregoing chapter, he
left the count in his apartment, and proceeded to the Blacquernal
Palace. We traced his first entrance into the court, but since then he
had frequently been summoned, not only by order of the Princess Anna
Comnena, who delighted in asking him questions concerning the customs
of his native country, and marking down the replies in her own inflated
language; but also by the direct command of the Emperor himself, who
had the humour of many princes, that of desiring to obtain direct
information from persons in a very inferior station in their Court. The
ring which the Princess had given to the Varangian, served as a
pass-token more than once, and was now so generally known by the slaves
of the palace, that Hereward had only to slip it into the hand of a
principal person among them, and was introduced into a small chamber,
not distant from the saloon already mentioned, dedicated to the Muses.
In this small apartment, the Emperor, his spouse Irene, and their
accomplished daughter Anna Comnena, were seated together, clad in very
ordinary apparel, as indeed the furniture of the room itself was of the
kind used by respectable citizens, saving that mattrasses, composed of
eiderdown, hung before each door to prevent the risk of eavesdropping.

"Our trusty Varangian," said the Empress.

"My guide and tutor respecting the manners of those steel-clad men,"
said the Princess Anna Comnena, "of whom it is so necessary that I
should form an accurate idea."

"Your Imperial Majesty," said the Empress, "will not, I trust, think
your consort and your muse-inspired daughter, are too many to share
with you the intelligence brought by this brave and loyal man?"

"Dearest wife and daughter," returned the Emperor, "I have hitherto
spared you the burden of a painful secret, which I have locked in my
own bosom, at whatever expense of solitary sorrow and unimparted
anxiety. Noble daughter, you in particular will feel this calamity,
learning, as you must learn, to think odiously of one, of whom it has
hitherto been your duty to hold a very different opinion."

"Holy Mary!" exclaimed the Princess.

"Rally yourself," said the Emperor; "remember you are a child of the
purple chamber, born, not to weep for your father's wrongs, but to
avenge them,--not to regard even him who has lain by your side as half
so important as the sacred Imperial grandeur, of which you are yourself
a partaker."

"What can such words preface?" said Anna Comnena, in great agitation.

"They say," answered the Emperor, "that the Caesar is an ungrateful man
to all my bounties, and even to that which annexed him to my own.
house, and made him by adoption my own son. He hath consorted himself
with a knot of traitors, whose very names are enough to raise the foul
fiend, as if to snatch his assured prey!"

"Could Nicephorus do this?" said the astonished and forlorn Princess;
"Nicephorus, who has so often called my eyes the lights by which he
steered his path? Could he do this to my father, to whose exploits he
has listened hour after hour, protesting that he knew not whether it
was the beauty of the language, or the heroism of the action, which
most enchanted him? Thinking with the same thought, seeing with the
same eye, loving with the same heart,--O, my father! it is impossible
that he could be so false. Think of the neighbouring Temple of the
Muses!"

"And if I did," murmured Alexius in his heart, "I should think of the
only apology which could be proposed for the traitor. A little is well
enough, but the full soul loatheth the honey-comb." Then speaking
aloud, "My daughter," he said, "be comforted; we ourselves were
unwilling to believe the shameful truth; but our guards have been
debauched; their commander, that ungrateful Achilles Tatius, with the
equal traitor, Agelastes, have been seduced to favour our imprisonment
or murder; and, alas for Greece in the very moment when she required
the fostering care of a parent, she was to be deprived of him by a
sudden and merciless blow!"

Here the Emperor wept, whether for the loss to be sustained by his
subjects, or of his own life, it is hard to say.

"Methinks," said Irene, "your Imperial Highness is slow in taking
measures against the danger."

"Under your gracious permission, mother," answered the Princess, "I
would rather say he was hasty in giving belief to it. Methinks the
evidence of a Varangian, granting him to be ever so stout a
man-at-arms, is but a frail guarantee against the honour of your
son-in-law--the approved bravery and fidelity of the captain of your
guards--the deep sense, virtue, and profound wisdom, of the greatest of
your philosophers"--

"And the conceit of an over-educated daughter," said the Emperor, "who
will not allow her parent to judge in what most concerns him. I will
tell thee, Anna, I know every one of them, and the trust which may be
reposed in them; the honour of your Nicephorus--the bravery and
fidelity of the Acolyte--and the virtue and wisdom of Agelastes--have I
not had them all in my purse? And had my purse continued well filled,
and my arm strong as it was of late, there they would have still
remained. But the butterflies went off as the weather became cold, and
I must meet the tempest without their assistance. You talk of want of
proof? I have proof sufficient when I see danger; this honest soldier
brought me indications which corresponded with my own private remarks,
made on purpose. Varangian he shall be of Varangians; Acolyte he shall
be named, in place of the present traitor; and who knows what may come
thereafter?"

"May it please your Highness," said the Varangian, who had been
hitherto silent, "many men in this empire rise to dignity by the fall
of their original patrons, but it is a road to greatness to which I
cannot reconcile my conscience; moreover, having recovered a friend,
from whom I was long ago separated, I shall require, in short space,
your Imperial license for going hence, where I shall leave thousands of
enemies behind me, and spending my life, like many of my countrymen,
under the banner of King William of Scotland"--

"Part with _thee_, most inimitable man!" cried the Emperor, with
emphasis; "where shall I get a soldier--a champion--a friend--so
faithful?"

"Noble sir," replied the Anglo-Saxon, "I am every way sensible to your
goodness and munificence; but let me entreat you to call me by my own
name, and to promise me nothing but your forgiveness, for my having
been the agent of such confusion among your Imperial servants. Not only
is the threatened fate of Achilles Tatius, my benefactor; of the
Caesar, whom I think my well-wisher; and even of Agelastes himself,
painful, so far as it is of my bringing round; but also I have known it
somehow happen, that those on whom your Imperial Majesty has lavished
the most valuable expressions of your favour one day, were the next day
food to fatten the chough and crow. And this, I acknowledge, is a
purpose, for which I would not willingly have it said I had brought my
English limbs to these Grecian shores."

"Call thee by thine own name, my Edward," said the Emperor, (while he
muttered aside--"by Heaven, I have again forgot the name of the
barbarian!")--"by thine own name certainly for the present, but only
until we shall devise one more fitted for the trust we repose in thee.
Meantime, look at this scroll, which contains, I think, all the
particulars which we have been able to learn of this plot, and give it
to these unbelieving women, who will not credit that an Emperor is in
danger, till the blades of the conspirators' poniards are clashing
within his ribs."

Hereward did as he was commanded, and having looked at the scroll, and
signified, by bending his head, his acquiescence in its contents, he
presented it to Irene, who had not read long, ere, with a countenance
so embittered that she had difficulty in pointing out the cause of her
displeasure to her daughter, she bade her, with animation, "Read
that--read that, and judge of the gratitude and affection of thy
Caesar!"

The Princess Anna Comnena awoke from a state of profound and
overpowering melancholy, and looked at the passage pointed out to her,
at first with an air of languid curiosity, which presently deepened
into the most intense interest. She clutched the scroll as a falcon
does his prey, her eye lightened with indignation; and it was with the
cry of the bird when in fury that she exclaimed, "Bloody-minded,
double-hearted traitor! what wouldst thou have? Yes, father," she said,
rising in fury, "it is no longer the voice of a deceived princess that
shall intercede to avert from the traitor Nicephorus the doom he has
deserved! Did he think that one born in the purple chamber could be
divorced--murdered, perhaps--with the petty formula of the Romans,
'Restore the keys---be no longer my domestic drudge?'[Footnote: The
laconic form of the Roman divorce.] Was a daughter of the blood of
Comnenus liable to such insults as the meanest of Quirites might bestow
on a family housekeeper!"

So saying, she dashed the tears from her eyes, and her countenance,
naturally that of beauty and gentleness, became animated with the
expression of a fury. Hereward looked at her with a mixture of fear,
dislike and compassion. She again burst forth, for nature having given
her considerable abilities, had lent her at the same time an energy of
passion, far superior in power to the cold ambition of Irene, or the
wily, ambidexter, shuffling policy of the Emperor.

"He shall abye it," said the Princess; "he shall dearly abye it! False,
smiling, cozening traitor!--and for that unfeminine barbarian!
Something of this I guessed, even at that old fool's banqueting-house;
and yet if this unworthy Caesar submits his body to the chance of arms,
he is less prudent than I have some reason to believe. Think you he
will have the madness to brand us with such open neglect, my father?
and will you not invent some mode of ensuring our revenge?"

"Soh!" thought the Emperor, "this difficulty is over; she will run down
hill to her revenge, and will need the snaffle and curb more than the
lash. If every jealous dame in Constantinople were to pursue her fury
as unrelentingly, our laws should be written, like Draco's, not in ink,
but in blood.--Attend to me now," he said aloud, "my wife, my daughter,
and thou, dear Edward, and you shall learn, and you three only, my mode
of navigating the vessel of the state through these shoals."

"Let us see distinctly," continued Alexius, "the means by which they
propose to act, and these shall instruct us how to meet them. A certain
number of the Varangians are unhappily seduced, under pretence of
wrongs, artfully stirred up by their villanous general. A part of them
are studiously to be arranged nigh our person--the traitor Ursel, some
of them suppose, is dead, but if it were so, his name is sufficient to
draw together his old factionaries--I have a means of satisfying them
on that point, on which I shall remain silent for the present.--A
considerable body of the Immortal Guards have also given way to
seduction; they are to be placed to support the handful of treacherous
Varangians, who are in the plot to attack our person.--Now. a slight
change in the stations of the soldiery, which thou, my faithful Edward
--or--a--a--whatever thou art named,--for which thou, I say, shalt have
full authority, will derange the plans of the traitors, and place the
true men in such position around them as to cut them to pieces with
little trouble."

"And the combat, my lord?" said the Saxon.

"Thou hadst been no true Varangian hadst thou not enquired after that,"
said the Emperor, nodding good-humouredly towards him. "As to the
combat, the Caesar has devised it, and it shall be my care that he
shall not retreat from the dangerous part of it. He cannot in honour
avoid fighting with this woman, strange as the combat is; and however
it ends, the conspiracy will break forth, and as assuredly as it comes
against persons prepared, and in arms, shall it be stifled in the blood
of the conspirators!"

"My revenge does not require this," said the Princess; "and your
Imperial honour is also interested that this Countess shall be
protected."

"It is little business of mine," said the Emperor. "She comes here with
her husband altogether uninvited. He behaves with insolence in my
presence, and deserves whatever may be the issue to himself or his lady
of their mad adventure. In sooth, I desired little more than to give
him a fright with those animals whom their ignorance judged enchanted,
and to give his wife a slight alarm about the impetuosity of a Grecian
lover, and there my vengeance should have ended. But it may be that his
wife may be taken under my protection, now that little revenge is over."

"And a paltry revenge it was," said the Empress, "that you, a man past
middle life, and with a wife who might command some attention, should
constitute yourself the object of alarm to such a handsome man as Count
Robert, and the Amazon his wife."

"By your favour, dame Irene, no," said the Emperor. "I left that part
of the proposed comedy to my son-in-law the Caesar."

But when the poor Emperor had in some measure stopt one floodgate, he
effectually opened another, and one which was more formidable. "The
more shame to your Imperial wisdom, my father!" exclaimed the Princess
Anna Comnena; "it is a shame, that with wisdom and a beard like yours,
you should be meddling in such indecent follies as admit disturbance
into private families, and that family your own daughter's! Who can say
that the Caesar Nicephorus Briennius ever looked astray towards another
woman than his wife, till the Emperor taught him to do so, and involved
him in a web of intrigue and treachery, in which he has endangered the
life of his father-in-law?"

"Daughter! daughter! daughter!"--said the Empress; "daughter of a
she-wolf, I think, to goad her parent at such an unhappy time, when all
the leisure he has is too little to defend his life!"

"Peace, I pray you, women both, with your senseless clamours," answered
Alexius, "and let me at least swim for my life undisturbed with your
folly. God knows if I am a man to encourage, I will not say the reality
of wrong, but even its mere appearance!"

These words he uttered, crossing himself, with a devout groan. His wife
Irene, in the meantime, stept before him, and said, with a bitterness
in her looks and accent, which only long-concealed nuptial hatred
breaking forth at once could convey,--"Alexius, terminate this affair
how it will, you have lived a hypocrite, and thou wilt not fail to die
one." So saying, with an air of noble indignation, and carrying her
daughter along with her, she swept out of the apartment.

The Emperor looked after her in some confusion. He soon, however,
recovered his self-possession, and turning to Hereward, with a look of
injured majesty, said, "Ah! my dear Edward,"---for the word had become
rooted in his mind, instead of the less euphonic name of
Hereward,--"thou seest how it is even with the greatest, and that the
Emperor, in moments of difficulty, is a subject of misconstruction, as
well as the meanest burgess of Constantinople; nevertheless, my trust
is so great in thee, Edward, that I would have thee believe, that my
daughter, Anna Comnena, is not of the temper of her mother, but rather
of my own; honouring, thou mayst see, with religious fidelity, the
unworthy ties which I hope soon to break, and assort her with other
fetters of Cupid, which shall be borne more lightly. Edward, my main
trust is in thee. Accident presents us with an opportunity, happy of
the happiest, so it be rightly improved, of having all the traitors
before us assembled on one fair field. Think, _then_, on that day, as
the Franks say at their tournaments, that fair eyes behold thee. Thou
canst not devise a gift within my power, but I will gladly load thee
with it."

"It needs not," said the Varangian, somewhat coldly; "my highest
ambition is to merit the epitaph upon my tomb, 'Hereward was faithful.'
I am about, however, to demand a proof of your imperial confidence,
which, perhaps, you may think a startling one."

"Indeed!" said the Emperor. "What, in one word, is thy demand?"

"Permission," replied Hereward, "to go to the Duke of Bouillon's
encampment, and entreat his presence in the lists, to witness this
extraordinary combat."

"That he may return with his crusading madmen," said the Emperor, "and
sack Constantinople, under pretence of doing justice to his
Confederates? This, Varangian, is at least speaking thy mind openly."

"No, by Heavens!" said Hereward suddenly; "the Duke of Bouillon shall
come with no more knights than may be a reasonable guard, should
treachery be offered to the Countess of Paris."

"Well, even in this," said the Emperor, "will I be conformable; and if
thou, Edward, betrayest my trust, think that thou forfeitest all that
my friendship has promised, and dost incur, besides, the damnation that
is due to the traitor who betrays with a kiss."

"For thy reward, noble sir," answered the Varangian, "I hereby renounce
all claim to it. When the diadem is once more firmly fixed upon thy
brow, and the sceptre in thy hand, if I am then alive, if my poor
services should deserve so much, I will petition thee for the means of
leaving this court, and returning to the distant island in which I was
born. Meanwhile, think me not unfaithful, because I have for a time the
means of being so with effect. Your Imperial Highness shall learn that
Hereward is as true as is your right hand to your left."--So saying, he
took his leave with a profound obeisance.

The Emperor gazed after him with a countenance in which doubt was
mingled with admiration.

"I have trusted him," he said, "with all he asked, and with the power
of ruining me entirely, if such be his purpose. He has but to breathe a
whisper, and the whole mad crew of crusaders, kept in humour at the
expense of so much current falsehood, and so much more gold, will
return with fire and sword to burn down Constantinople, and sow with
salt the place where it stood. I have done what I had resolved never to
do,--I have ventured kingdom and life on the faith of a man born of
woman. How often have I said, nay, sworn, that I would not hazard
myself on such peril, and yet, step by step, I have done so! I cannot
tell--there is in that man's looks and words a good faith which
overwhelms me; and, what is almost incredible, my belief in him has
increased in proportion to his showing me how slight my power was over
him. I threw, like the wily angler, every bait I could devise, and some
of them such as a king would scarcely have disdained; to none of these
would he rise; but yet he gorges, I may say, the bare hook, and enters
upon my service without a shadow of self-interest.--Can this be
double-distilled treachery?--or can it be what men call
disinterestedness?--If I thought him false, the moment is not yet
past--he has not yet crossed the bridge--he has not passed the guards
of the palace, who have no hesitation, and know no disobedience--But
no--I were then alone in the land, and without a friend or
confidant.--I hear the sound of the outer gate unclose, the sense of
danger certainly renders my ears more acute than usual.--It shuts
again--the die is cast. He is at liberty--and Alexius Comnenus must
stand or fall, according to the uncertain faith of a mercenary
Varangian." He clapt his hands; a slave appeared, of whom he demanded
wine. He drank, and his heart was cheered within him. "I am decided,"
he said, "and will abide with resolution the cast of the throw, for
good or for evil."

So saying, he retired to his apartment, and was not again seen during
that night.




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SECOND.

     And aye, as if for death, some lonely trumpet peal'd.
                                                    CAMPBELL.


The Varangian, his head agitated with the weighty matters which imposed
on him, stopt from time to time as he journeyed through the moonlight
streets, to arrest passing ideas as they shot through his mind, and
consider them with accuracy in all their bearings. His thoughts were
such as animated or alarmed him alternately, each followed by a
confused throng of accompaniments which it suggested, and banished
again in its turn by reflections of another description. It was one of
those conjunctures when the minds of ordinary men feel themselves
unable to support a burden which is suddenly flung upon them, and when,
on the contrary, those of uncommon fortitude, and that best of Heaven's
gifts, good sense, founded on presence of mind, feel their talents
awakened and regulated for the occasion, like a good steed under the
management of a rider of courage and experience.

As he stood in one of those fits of reverie, which repeatedly during
that night arrested his stern military march, Hereward thought that his
ear caught the note of a distant trumpet. This surprised him; a trumpet
blown at that late hour, and in the streets of Constantinople, argued
something extraordinary; for as all military movements were the subject
of special ordinance, the etiquette of the night could hardly have been
transgressed without some great cause. The question was, what that
cause could be?

Had the insurrection broken out unexpectedly, and in a different manner
from what the conspirators proposed to themselves?--If so, his meeting
with his plighted bride, after so many years' absence, was but a
delusive preface to their separating for ever. Or had the crusaders, a
race of men upon whose motions it was difficult to calculate, suddenly
taken arms and returned from the opposite shore to surprise the city?
This might very possibly be the case; so numerous had been the
different causes of complaint afforded to the crusaders, that, when
they were now for the first time assembled into one body, and had heard
the stories which they could reciprocally tell concerning the perfidy
of the Greeks, nothing was so likely, so natural, even perhaps so
justifiable, as that they should study revenge.

But the sound rather resembled a point of war regularly blown, than the
tumultuous blare of bugle-horns and trumpets, the accompaniments at
once, and the annunciation, of a taken town, in which the horrid
circumstances of storm had not yet given place to such stern peace as
the victors' weariness of slaughter and rapine allows at length to the
wretched inhabitants. Whatever it was, it was necessary that Hereward
should learn its purport, and therefore he made his way into a broad
street near the barracks, from, which the sound seemed to come, to
which point, indeed, his way was directed for other reasons.

The inhabitants of that quarter of the town did not appear violently
startled by this military signal. The moonlight slept on the street,
crossed by the gigantic shadowy towers of Sancta Sophia. No human being
appeared in the streets, and such as for an instant looked from their
doors or from their lattices, seemed to have their curiosity quickly
satisfied, for they withdrew their heads, and secured the opening
through which they had peeped.

Hereward could not help remembering the traditions which were recounted
by the fathers of his tribe, in the deep woods, of Hampshire, and which
spoke of invisible huntsmen, who were heard to follow with viewless
horses and hounds the unseen chase through the depths of the forests of
Germany. Such it seemed were the sounds with which these haunted woods
were wont to ring while the wild chase was up; and with such apparent
terror did the hearers listen to their clamour.

"Fie!" he said, as he suppressed within him a tendency to the same
superstitious fears; "do such childish fancies belong to a man trusted
with so much, and from whom so much is expected?" He paced down the
street, therefore, with his battle-axe over his shoulder, and the first
person whom he saw venturing to look out of his door, he questioned
concerning the cause of this military music at such an unaccustomed
hour.

"I cannot tell, so please you, my lord," said the citizen, unwilling,
it appeared, to remain in the open air, or to enter into conversation,
and greatly disposed to decline further questioning. This was the
political citizen of Constantinople whom we met with at the beginning
of this history, and who, hastily stepping into his habitation,
eschewed all further conversation.

The wrestler Stephanos showed himself at the next door, which was
garlanded with oak and ivy leaves, in honour of some recent victory. He
stood unshrinking, partly encouraged by the consciousness of personal
strength, and partly by a rugged surliness of temper, which is often
mistaken among persons of this kind for real courage. His admirer and
flatterer, Lysimachus, kept himself ensconced behind his ample
shoulders.

As Hereward passed, he put the same question as he did to the former
citizen,--"Know you the meaning of these trumpets sounding so late?"

"You should know best yourself," answered Stephanos, doggedly; "for, to
judge by your axe and helmet, they are your trumpets, and not ours,
which disturb honest men in their first sleep."

"Varlet!" answered the Varangian, with an emphasis which made the
prizer start,--"but--when that trumpet sounds, it is no time for a
soldier to punish insolence as it deserves."

The Greek started back and bolted into his house, nearly overthrowing
in the speed of his retreat the artist Lysimachus, who was listening to
what passed.

Hereward passed on to the barracks, where the military music had seemed
to halt; but on the Varangian crossing the threshold of the ample
courtyard, it broke forth again with a tremendous burst, whose clangour
almost stunned him, though well accustomed to the sounds. "What is the
meaning of this, Engelbrecht?" he said to the Varangian sentinel, who
paced axe in hand before the entrance.

"The proclamation of a challenge and combat," answered Engelbrecht.
"Strange things towards, comrade; the frantic crusaders have bit the
Grecians, and infected them with their humour of tilting, as they say
dogs do each other with madness."

Hereward made no reply to the sentinel's speech, but pressed forward
into a knot of his fellow-soldiers who were assembled in the court,
half-armed, or, more properly, in total disarray, as just arisen from
their beds, and huddled around the trumpets of their corps, which were
drawn out in full pomp. He of the gigantic instrument, whose duty it
was to intimate the express commands of the Emperor, was not wanting in
his place, and the musicians were supported by a band of the Varangians
in arms, headed by Achilles Tatius himself. Hereward could also notice,
on approaching nearer, as his comrades made way for him, that six of
the Imperial heralds were on duty on this occasion; four of these (two
acting at the same time) had already made proclamation, which was to be
repeated for the third time by the two last, as was the usual fashion
in Constantinople with Imperial mandates of great consequence. Achilles
Tatius, the moment he saw his confidant, made him a sign, which
Hereward understood as conveying a desire to speak with him after the
proclamation was over. The herald, after the flourish of trumpets was
finished, commenced in. these words:

"By the authority of the resplendent and divine Prince Alexius
Comnenus, Emperor of the most holy Roman Empire, his Imperial Majesty
desires it to be made known to all and sundry the subjects of his
empire, whatever their race of blood may be, or at whatever shrine of
divinity they happen, to bend--Know ye, therefore, that upon the second
day after this is dated, our beloved son-in-law, the much esteemed
Caesar, hath taken upon, him to do battle with our sworn enemy, Robert,
Count of Paris, on account of his insolent conduct, by presuming
publicly to occupy our royal seat, and no less by breaking, in our
Imperial presence, those curious specimens of art, ornamenting our
throne, called by tradition the Lions of Solomon. And that there may
not remain a man in Europe who shall dare to say that the Grecians are
behind other parts of the world in any of the manly exercises which
Christian nations use, the said noble enemies, renouncing all
assistance from falsehood, from spells, or from magic, shall debate
this quarrel in three courses with grinded spears, and three passages
of arms with sharpened swords; the field to be at the judgment of the
honourable Emperor, and to be decided at his most gracious and unerring
pleasure. And so God show the right!"

Another formidable flourish of the trumpets concluded the ceremony.
Achilles then dismissed the attendant troops, as well as the heralds
and musicians, to their respective quarters; and having got Hereward
close to his side, enquired of him whether he had learned any thing of
the prisoner, Robert, Count of Paris.

"Nothing," said the Varangian, "save the tidings your proclamation
contains."

"You think, then," said Achilles, "that the Count has been a party to
it."

"He ought to have been so," answered the Varangian. "I know no one but
himself entitled to take burden for his appearance in the lists."

"Why, look you," said the Acolyte, "my most excellent, though
blunt-witted Hereward, this Caesar of ours hath had the extravagance to
venture his tender wit in comparison to that of Achilles Tatius. He
stands upon his honour, too, this ineffable fool, and is displeased
with the idea of being supposed either to challenge a woman, or to
receive a challenge at her hand. He has substituted, therefore, the
name of the lord instead of the lady. If the Count fail to appear, the
Caesar walks forward challenger and successful combatant at a cheap
rate, since no one has encountered him, and claims that the lady should
be delivered up to him as a captive of his dreaded bow and spear. This
will be the signal for a general tumult, in which, if the Emperor be
not slain on the spot, he will be conveyed to the dungeon of his own
Blacquernal, there to endure the doom which his cruelty has inflicted
upon so many others."

"But"---said the Varangian.

"But---but--but," said his officer; "but thou art a fool. Canst thou
not see that this gallant Caesar is willing to avoid the risk of
encountering with this lady, while he earnestly desires to be supposed
willing to meet her husband? It is our business to fix the combat in
such a shape as to bring all who are prepared for insurrection together
in arms to play their parts. Do thou only see that our trusty friends
are placed near to the Emperor's person, and in such a manner as to
keep from him the officious and meddling portion of guards, who may be
disposed to assist him; and whether the Caesar fights a combat with
lord or lady, or whether there be any combat at all or not, the
revolution shall be accomplished, and the Tatii shall replace the
Comneni upon the Imperial throne of Constantinople. Go, my trusty
Hereward. Thou wilt not forget that the signal word of the insurrection
is Ursel, who lives in the affections of the people, although his body,
it is said, has long lain a corpse in the dungeons of the Blacquernal."

"What was this Ursel," said Hereward, "of whom I hear men talk so
variously?"

"A competitor for the crown with Alexius Comnenus--good, brave, and
honest; but overpowered by the cunning, rather than the skill or
bravery of his foe. He died, as I believe, in the Blacquernal; though
when, or how, there are few that can say. But, up and be doing, my
Hereward! Speak encouragement to the Varangians--Interest whomsoever
thou canst to join us. Of the Immortals, as they are called, and of the
discontented citizens, enough are prepared to fill up the cry, and
follow in the wake of those on whom we must rely as the beginners of
the enterprise. No longer shall Alexius's cunning, in avoiding popular
assemblies, avail to protect him; he cannot, with regard to his honour,
avoid being present at a combat to be fought beneath his own eye; and
Mercury be praised for the eloquence which inspired him, after some
hesitation, to determine for the proclamation!"

"You have seen him, then, this evening?" said the Varangian.

"Seen him! Unquestionably," answered the Acolyte. "Had I ordered these
trumpets to be sounded without his knowledge, the blast had blown the
head from my shoulders."

"I had wellnigh met you at the palace," said Hereward; while his heart
throbbed almost as high as if he had actually had such a dangerous
encounter.

"I heard something of it," said Achilles; "that you came to take the
parting orders of him who now acts the sovereign. Surely, had I seen
you there, with that steadfast, open, seemingly honest countenance,
cheating the wily Greek by very dint of bluntness, I had not forborne
laughing at the contrast between that and the thoughts of thy heart."

"God alone," said Hereward, "knows the thoughts of our hearts; but I
take him to witness, that I am faithful to my promise, and will
discharge the task intrusted to me."

"Bravo! mine honest Anglo-Saxon," said Achilles. "I pray thee to call
my slaves to unarm me; and when thou thyself doffest those weapons of
an ordinary life-guardsman, tell them they never shall above twice more
enclose the limbs of one for whom fate has much more fitting garments
in store."

Hereward dared not intrust his voice with an answer to so critical a
speech; he bowed profoundly, and retired to his own quarters in the
building.

Upon entering the apartment, he was immediately saluted by the voice of
Count Robert, in joyful accents, not suppressed by the fear of making
himself heard, though prudence should have made that uppermost in his
mind.

"Hast thou heard it, my dear Hereward," he said--"hast thou heard the
proclamation, by which this Greek antelope hath defied me to tilting
with grinded spears, and fighting three passages of arms with sharpened
swords? Yet there is something strange, too, that he should not think
it safer to hold my lady to the encounter! He may think, perhaps, that
the crusaders would not permit such a battle to be fought. But, by our
Lady of the Broken Lances! he little knows that the men of the West
hold their ladies' character for courage as jealously as they do their
own. This whole night have I been considering in what armour I shall
clothe me; what shift I shall make for a steed; and whether I shall not
honour him sufficiently by using Tranchefer, as my only weapon, against
his whole armour, offensive and defensive."

"I shall take care, however," said Hereward, "that, thou art better
provided in case of need.--Thou knowest not the Greeks."




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-THIRD.


The Varangian did not leave the Count of Paris until the latter had in
his hands his signet-ring, _semee_, (as the heralds express it,) _with
lances splintered_, and bearing the proud motto, "Mine yet unscathed."
Provided with this symbol of confidence, it was now his business to
take order for communicating the approaching solemnity to the leader of
the crusading army, and demanding from him, in the name of Robert of
Paris, and the Lady Brenhilda, such a detachment of western cavaliers
as might ensure strict observance of honour and honesty in the
arrangement of the lists, and during the progress of the combat. The
duties imposed on Hereward were such as to render it impossible for him
to proceed personally to the camp of Godfrey: and though there were
many of the Varangians in whose fidelity he could have trusted, he knew
of none among those under his immediate command whose intelligence, on
so novel an occasion, might be entirely depended on. In this
perplexity, he strolled, perhaps without well knowing why, to the
gardens of Agelastes, where fortune once more produced him an interview
with Bertha.

No sooner had Hereward made her aware of his difficulty, than the
faithful bower-maiden's resolution was taken.

"I see," said she, "that the peril of this part of the adventure must
rest with me; and wherefore should it not? My mistress, in the bosom of
prosperity, offered herself to go forth into the wide world for my
sake; I will for hers go to the camp of this Frankish lord. He is an
honourable man, and a pious Christian, and his followers are faithful
pilgrims. A woman can have nothing to fear who goes to such men upon
such an errand."

The Varangian, however, was too well acquainted with the manners of
camps to permit the fair Bertha to go alone. He provided, therefore,
for her safe-guard a trusty old soldier, bound to his person by long
kindness and confidence, and having thoroughly possessed her of the
particulars of the message she was to deliver, and desired her to be in
readiness without the enclosure at peep of dawn, returned once more to
his barracks.

With the earliest light, Hereward was again at the spot where he had
parted overnight with Bertha, accompanied by the honest soldier to
whose care he meant to confide her. In a short time, he had seen them
safely on board of a ferry-boat lying in the harbour; the master of
which readily admitted them, after some examination of their license,
to pass to Scutari, which was forged in the name of the Acolyte, as
authorised by that foul conspirator, and which agreed with the
appearance of old Osmund and his young charge.

The morning was lovely; and erelong the town of Scutari opened on the
view of the travellers, glittering, as now, with a variety of
architecture, which, though it might be termed fantastical, could not
be denied the praise of beauty. These buildings rose boldly out of a
thick grove of cypresses, and other huge trees, the larger, probably,
as they were respected for filling the cemeteries, and being the
guardians of the dead.

At the period we mention, another circumstance, no less striking than
beautiful, rendered doubly interesting a scene which must have been at
all times greatly so. A large portion of that miscellaneous army which
came to regain the holy places of Palestine, and the blessed Sepulchre
itself, from the infidels, had established themselves in a camp within
a mile, or thereabouts, of Scutari. Although, therefore, the crusaders
were destitute in a great measure of the use of tents, the army
(excepting the pavilions of some leaders of high rank) had constructed
for themselves temporary huts, not unpleasing to the eye, being
decorated with leaves and flowers, while the tall pennons and banners
that floated over them with various devices, showed that the flower of
Europe were assembled at that place. A loud and varied murmur,
resembling that of a thronged hive, floated from the camp of the
crusaders to the neighbouring town of Scutari, and every now and then
the deep tone was broken by some shriller sound, the note of some
musical instrument, or the treble scream of some child or female, in
fear or in gaiety.

The party at length landed in safety; and as they approached one of the
gates of the camp, there sallied forth a brisk array of gallant
cavaliers, pages, and squires, exercising their masters' horses or
their own. From the noise they made, conversing at the very top of
their voices, galloping, curvetting, and prancing their palfreys, it
seemed as if their early discipline had called them to exercise ere the
fumes of last night's revel were thoroughly dissipated by repose. So
soon as they saw Bertha and her party, they approached them with cries
which marked their country was Italy--"Al'erta! al'erta!--Roba de
guadagno, cameradi!" [Footnote: That is--"Take heed! take heed! there
is booty, comrades!"]

They gathered round the Anglo-Saxon maiden and her companions,
repeating their cries in a manner which made Bertha tremble. Their
general demand was, "What was her business in their camp?"

"I would to the general-in-chief, cavaliers," answered Bertha, "having
a secret message to his ear."

"For whose ear?" said a leader of the party, a handsome youth of about
eighteen years of age, who seemed either to have a sounder brain than
his fellows, or to have overflowed it with less wine. "Which of our
leaders do you come hither to see?" he demanded.

"Godfrey of Bouillon."

"Indeed!" said the page who had spoken first; "can nothing of less
consequence serve thy turn? Take a look amongst us; young are we all,
and reasonably wealthy. My Lord of Bouillon is old, and if he has any
sequins, he is not like to lavish them in this way."

"Still I have a token to Godfrey of Bouillon," answered Bertha, "an
assured one; and he will little thank any who obstructs my free passage
to him;" and therewithal showing a little case, in which the signet of
the Count of Paris was enclosed, "I will trust it in your hands," she
said, "if you promise not to open it, but to give me free access to the
noble leader of the crusaders."

"I will," said the youth, "and if such be the Duke's pleasure, thou
shalt be admitted to him."

"Ernest the Apulian, thy dainty Italian wit is caught in a trap," said
one of his companions.

"Thou art an ultramontane fool, Polydore," returned Ernest; "there may
be more in this than either thy wit or mine is able to fathom. This
maiden and one of her attendants wear a dress belonging to the
Varangian Imperial guard. They have perhaps been intrusted with a
message from the Emperor, and it is not irreconcilable with Alexius's
politics to send it through such messengers as these. Let us,
therefore, convey them in all honour to the General's tent."

"With all my heart," said Polydore. "A blue-eyed wench is a pretty
thing, but I like not the sauce of the camp-marshal, nor his taste in
attiring men who gave way to temptation. [Footnote: Persons among the
Crusaders found guilty of certain offences, did penance in a dress of
tar and feathers though it is supposed a punishment of modern
invention.] Yet, ere I prove a fool like my companion, I would ask who
or what this pretty maiden is, who comes to put noble princes and holy
pilgrims in mind that they have in their time had the follies of men?"

Bertha advanced and whispered in the ear of Ernest. Meantime joke
followed jest, among Polydore and the rest of the gay youths, in
riotous and ribald succession, which, however characteristic of the
rude speakers, may as well be omitted here. Their effect was to shake
in some degree the fortitude of the Saxon maiden, who had some
difficulty in mustering courage to address them. "As you have mothers,
gentlemen," she said, "as you have fair sisters, whom you would protect
from dishonour with your best blood--as you love and honour those holy
places which you are sworn to free from the infidel enemy, have
compassion on me, that you may merit success in your undertaking!"

"Fear nothing, maiden," said Ernest, "I will be your protector; and
you, my comrades, be ruled by me. I have, during your brawling, taken a
view, though somewhat against my promise, of the pledge which she
bears, and if she who presents it is affronted or maltreated, be
assured Godfrey of Bouillon will severely avenge the wrong done her."

"Nay, comrade, if thou canst warrant us so much," said Polydore, "I
will myself be most anxious to conduct the young woman in honour and
safety to Sir Godfrey's tent."

"The Princes," said Ernest, "must be nigh meeting there in council.
What I have said I will warrant and uphold with hand and life. More I
might guess, but I conclude this sensible young maiden can speak for
herself."

"Now, Heaven bless thee, gallant squire," said Bertha, "and make thee
alike brave and fortunate! Embarrass yourself no farther about me, than
to deliver me safe to your leader, Godfrey."

"We spend time," said Ernest, springing from his horse. "You are no
soft Eastern, fair maid, and I presume you will find yourself under no
difficulty in managing a quiet horse?"

"Not the least," said Bertha, as, wrapping herself in her cassock, she
sprung from the ground, and alighted upon the spirited palfrey, as a
linnet stoops upon a rose-bush. "And now, sir, as my business really
brooks no delay, I will be indebted to you to show me instantly to the
tent of Duke Godfrey of Bouillon."

By availing herself of this courtesy of the young Apulian, Bertha
imprudently separated herself from the old Varangian; but the
intentions of the youth were honourable, and he conducted her through
the tents and huts to the pavilion of the celebrated General-in-chief
of the Crusade.

"Here," he said, "you must tarry for a space, under the guardianship of
my companions," (for two or three of the pages had accompanied them,
out of curiosity to see the issue,) "and I will take the commands of
the Duke of Bouillon upon the subject."

To this nothing could be objected, and Bertha had nothing better to do,
than to admire the outside of the tent, which, in one of Alexius's fits
of generosity and munificence, had been presented by the Greek Emperor
to the Chief of the Franks. It was raised upon tall spear-shaped poles,
which had the semblance of gold; its curtains were of thick stuff,
manufactured of silk, cotton, and gold thread. The warders who stood
round, were (at least during the time that the council was held) old
grave men, the personal squires of the body, most of them, of the
sovereigns who had taken the Cross, and who could, therefore, be
trusted as a guard over the assembly, without danger of their blabbing
what they might overhear. Their appearance was serious and considerate,
and they looked like men who had taken upon them the Cross, not as an
idle adventure of arms, but as a purpose of the most solemn and serious
nature. One of these stopt the Italian, and demanded what business
authorized him to press forward into the council of the crusaders, who
were already taking their seats. The page answered by giving his name,
"Ernest of Otranto, page of Prince Tancred;" and stated that he
announced a young woman, who bore a token to the Duke of Bouillon,
adding that it was accompanied by a message for his own ear.

Bertha, meantime, laid aside her mantle, or upper garment, and disposed
the rest of her dress according to the Anglo-Saxon costume. She had
hardly completed this task, before the page of Prince Tancred returned,
to conduct her into the presence of the council of the Crusade. She
followed his signal; while the other young men who had accompanied her,
wondering at the apparent ease with which she gained admittance, drew
back to a respectful distance from the tent, and there canvassed the
singularity of their morning's adventure.

In the meanwhile, the ambassadress herself entered the council chamber,
exhibiting an agreeable mixture of shamefacedness and reserve, together
with a bold determination to do her duty at all events. There were
about fifteen of the principal crusaders assembled in council, with
their chieftain Godfrey. He himself was a tall strong man, arrived at
that period of life in--which men are supposed to have lost none of
their resolution, while they have acquired a wisdom and circumspection
unknown to their earlier years. The countenance of Godfrey bespoke both
prudence and boldness, and resembled his hair, where a few threads of
silver were already mingled with his raven locks.

Tancred, the noblest knight of the Christian chivalry, sat at no great
distance from him, with Hugh, Earl of Vermandois, generally called the
Great Count, the selfish and wily Bohemond, the powerful Raymond of
Provence, and others of the principal crusaders, all more or less
completely sheathed in armour.

Bertha did not allow her courage to be broken down, but advancing with
a timid grace towards Godfrey, she placed in his hands the signet which
had been restored to her by the young page, and after a deep obeisance,
spoke these words: "Godfrey, Count of Bouillon, Duke of Lorraine the
Lower, Chief of the Holy Enterprise called the Crusade, and you, his
gallant comrades, peers, and companions, by whatever titles you may be
honoured, I, an humble maiden of England, daughter of Engelred,
originally a franklin of Hampshire, and since Chieftain of the
Foresters, or free Anglo-Saxons, under the command of the celebrated
Edric, do claim what credence is due to the bearer of the true pledge
which I put into your hand, on the part of one not the least
considerable of your own body, Count Robert of Paris"---

"Our most honourable confederate," said Godfrey, looking at the ring.
"Most of you, my lords, must, I think, know this signet--a field sown
with the fragments of many splintered lances." The signet was handed
from one of the Assembly to another, and generally recognised.

When Godfrey had signified so much, the maiden resumed her message. "To
all true crusaders, therefore, comrades of Godfrey of Bouillon, and
especially to the Duke himself,--to all, I say, excepting Bohemond of
Tarentum, whom he counts unworthy of his notice"--

"Hah! me unworthy of his notice," said Bohemond. "What mean you by
that, damsel?--But the Count of Paris shall answer it to me."

"Under your favour, Sir Bohemond," said Godfrey, "no. Our articles
renounce the sending of challenges among ourselves, and the matter, if
not dropt betwixt the parties, must be referred to the voice of this
honourable council."

"I think I guess the business now, my lord," said Bohemond. "The Count
of Paris is disposed to turn and tear me, because I offered him good
counsel on the evening before we left Constantinople, when he neglected
to accept or be guided by it"--

"It will be the more easily explained when we have heard his message,"
said Godfrey.--"Speak forth Lord Robert of Paris's charge, damsel, that
we may take some order with that which now seems a perplexed business."

Bertha resumed her message; and, having briefly narrated the recent
events, thus concluded:--"The battle is to be done to-morrow, about two
hours after daybreak, and the Count entreats of the noble Duke of
Lorraine that he will permit some fifty of the lances of France to
attend the deed of arms, and secure that fair and honourable conduct
which he has otherwise some doubts of receiving at the hands of his
adversary. Or if any young and gallant knight should, of his own free
will, wish to view the said combat, the Count will feel his presence as
an honour; always he desires that the name of such knight be numbered
carefully with the armed crusaders who shall attend in the lists, and
that the whole shall be limited, by Duke Godfrey's own inspection, to
fifty lances only, which are enough to obtain the protection required,
while more would be considered as a preparation for aggression upon the
Grecians, and occasion the revival of disputes which are now happily at
rest."

Bertha had no sooner finished delivering her manifesto, and made with
great grace her obeisance to the council, than a sort of whisper took
place in the assembly, which soon assumed a more lively tone.

Their solemn vow not to turn their back upon Palestine, now that they
had set their hands to the plough, was strongly urged by some of the
elder knights of the council, and two or three high prelates, who had
by this time entered to take share in the deliberations. The young
knights, on the other hand, were fired with indignation on hearing the
manner in which their comrade had been trepanned; and few of them could
think of missing a combat in the lists in a country in which such
sights were so rare, and where one was to be fought so near them.

Godfrey rested his brow on his hand, and seemed in great perplexity. To
break with the Greeks, after having suffered so many injuries in order
to maintain the advantage of keeping the peace with them, seemed very
impolitic, and a sacrifice of all he had obtained by a long course of
painful forbearance towards Alexius Comnenus. On the other hand, he was
bound as a man of honour to resent the injury offered to Count Robert
of Paris, whose reckless spirit of chivalry made him the darling of the
army. It was the cause, too, of a beautiful lady, and a brave one:
every knight in the host would think himself bound, by his vow, to
hasten to her defence. When Godfrey spoke, it was to complain of the
difficulty of the determination, and the short time there was to
consider the case.

"With submission to my Lord Duke of Lorraine," said Tancred, "I was a
knight ere I was a crusader, and took on me the vows of chivalry, ere I
placed this blessed, sign upon my shoulder: the vow first made must be
first discharged. I will therefore do penance for neglecting, for a
space, the obligations of the second vow, while I observe that which
recalls me to the first duty of knighthood,--the relief of a distressed
lady in the hands of men whose conduct towards her, and towards this
host, in every respect entitles me to call them treacherous faitours."

"If my kinsman Tancred," said Bohemond, "will check his impetuosity,
and you, my lords, will listen, as you have sometimes deigned to do, to
my advice, I think I can direct you how to keep clear of any breach of
your oath, and yet fully to relieve our distressed fellow-pilgrims.--I
see some suspicious looks are cast towards me, which are caused perhaps
by the churlish manner in which this violent, and, in this case, almost
insane young warrior, has protested against receiving my assistance. My
great offence is the having given him warning, by precept and example,
of the treachery which was about to be practised against him, and
instructed him to use forbearance and temperance. My warning he
altogether contemned--my example he neglected to follow, and fell into
the snare which was spread, as it were, before his very eyes. Yet the
Count of Paris, in rashly contemning me, has acted only from a temper
which misfortune and disappointment have rendered irrational and
frantic. I am so far from bearing him ill-will, that, with your
lordship's permission, and that of the present council, I will haste to
the place of rendezvous with fifty lances, making up the retinue which
attends upon each to at least ten men, which will make the stipulated
auxiliary force equal to five hundred; and with these I can have little
doubt of rescuing the Count and his lady."

"Nobly proposed," said the Duke of Bouillon; "and with a charitable
forgiveness of injuries which becomes our Christian expedition. But
thou hast forgot the main difficulty, brother Bohemond, that we are
sworn never to turn back upon the sacred journey."

"If we can elude that oath upon the present occasion," said Bohemond,
"it becomes our duty to do so. Are we such bad horsemen, or are our
steeds so awkward, that we cannot rein them back from this to the
landing-place at Scutari? We can get them on shipboard in the same
retrograde manner, and when we arrive in Europe, where our vow binds us
no longer, the Count and Countess of Paris are rescued, and our vow
remains entire in the Chancery of Heaven."

A general shout arose--"Long life to the gallant Bohemond!--Shame to us
if we do not fly to the assistance of so valiant a knight, and a lady
so lovely, since we can do so without breach of our vow."

"The question," said Godfrey, "appears to me to be eluded rather than
solved; yet such evasions have been admitted by the most learned and
scrupulous clerks; nor do I hesitate to admit of Bohemond's expedient,
any more than if the enemy had attacked our rear, which might have
occasioned our countermarching to be a case of absolute necessity."

Some there were in the assembly, particularly the churchmen, inclined
to think that the oath by which the crusaders had solemnly bound
themselves, ought to be as literally obeyed. But Peter the Hermit, who
had a place in the council, and possessed great weight, declared it as
his opinion, "That since the precise observance of their vow would tend
to diminish the forces of the crusade, it was in fact unlawful, and
should not be kept according to the literal meaning, if, by a fair
construction, it could be eluded."

He offered himself to back the animal which he bestrode--that is, his
ass; and though he was diverted from showing this example by the
remonstrances of Godfrey of Bouillon, who was afraid of his becoming a
scandal in the eyes of the heathen, yet he so prevailed by his
arguments, that the knights, far from scrupling to countermarch,
eagerly contended which should have the honour of making one of the
party which should retrograde to Constantinople, see the combat, and
bring back to the host in safety the valorous Count of Paris, of whose
victory no one doubted, and his Amazonian Countess.

This emulation was also put an end to by the authority of Godfrey, who
himself selected the fifty knights who were to compose the party. They
were chosen from different nations, and the command of the whole was
given to young Tancred of Otranto. Notwithstanding the claim of
Bohemond, Godfrey detained the latter, under the pretext that his
knowledge of the country and people was absolutely necessary to enable
the council to form the plan of the campaign in Syria; but in reality
he dreaded the selfishness of a man of great ingenuity as well as
military skill, who, finding himself in a separate command, might be
tempted, should opportunities arise, to enlarge his own power and
dominion, at the expense of the pious purposes of the crusade in
general. The younger men of the expedition were chiefly anxious to
procure such horses as had been thoroughly trained, and could go
through with ease and temper the manoeuvre of equitation, by which it
was designed to render legitimate the movement which they had recourse
to. The selection was at length made, and the detachment ordered to
draw up in the rear, or upon the eastward line of the Christian
encampment. In the meanwhile, Godfrey charged Bertha with a message for
the Count of Paris, in which, slightly censuring him for not observing
more caution in his intercourse with the Greeks, he informed him that
he had sent a detachment of fifty lances, with the corresponding
squires, pages, men-at-arms, and cross-bows, five hundred in number,
commanded by the valiant Tancred, to his assistance. The Duke also
informed him, that he had added a suit of armour of the best temper
Milan could afford, together with a trusty war-horse, which he
entreated him to use upon the field of battle; for Bertha had not
omitted to intimate Count Robert's want of the means of knightly
equipment. The horse was brought before the pavilion accordingly,
completely barbed or armed in steel, and laden with armour for the
knight's body. Godfrey himself put the bridle into Bertha's hand.

"Thou need'st not fear to trust thyself with this steed, he is as
gentle and docile as he is fleet and brave. Place thyself on his back,
and take heed thou stir not from the side of the noble Prince Tancred
of Otranto, who will be the faithful defender of a maiden that has this
day shown dexterity, courage, and fidelity."

Bertha bowed low, as her cheeks glowed at praise from one whose talents
and worth were in such general esteem, as to have raised him to the
distinguished situation of leader of a host which numbered in it the
bravest and most distinguished captains of Christendom.

"Who are yon two persons?" continued Godfrey, speaking of the
companions of Bertha, whom he saw in the distance before the tent.

"The one," answered the damsel, "is the master of the ferry-boat which
brought me over; and the other an old Varangian who came hither as my
protector."

"As they may come to employ their eyes here, and their tongues on the
opposite side," returned the general of the crusaders, "I do not think
it prudent to let them accompany you. They shall remain here for some
short time. The citizens of Scutari will not comprehend for some space
what our intention is, and I could wish Prince Tancred and his
attendants to be the first to announce their own arrival."

Bertha accordingly intimated the pleasure of the French general to the
parties, without naming his motives; when the ferryman began to exclaim
on the hardship of intercepting him in his trade; and Osmund to
complain of being detained from his duties. But Bertha, by the orders
of Godfrey, left them, with the assurance that they would be soon at
liberty. Finding themselves thus abandoned, each applied himself to his
favourite amusement. The ferryman occupied himself in staring about at
all that was new; and Osmund, having in the meantime accepted an offer
of breakfast from some of the domestics, was presently engaged with a
flask of such red wine as would have reconciled him to a worse lot than
that which he at present experienced.

The detachment of Tancred, fifty spears and their armed retinue, which
amounted fully to five hundred men, after having taken a short and
hasty refreshment, were in arms and mounted before the sultry hour of
noon. After some manoeuvres, of which the Greeks of Scutari, whose
curiosity was awakened by the preparations of the detachment, were at a
loss to comprehend the purpose, they formed into a single column,
having four men in front. When the horses were in this position, the
whole riders at once began to rein back. The action was one to which
both the cavaliers and their horses were well accustomed, nor did it at
first afford much surprise to the spectators; but when the same
retrograde evolution was continued, and the body of crusaders seemed
about to enter the town of Scutari in so extraordinary a fashion, some
idea of the truth began to occupy the citizens. The cry at length was
general, when Tancred and a few others, whose horses were unusually
well-trained, arrived at the port, and possessed themselves of a
galley, into which they led their horses, and, disregarding all
opposition from the Imperial officers of the haven, pushed the vessel
off from the shore.

Other cavaliers did not accomplish their purpose so easily; the riders,
or the horses, were less accustomed to continue in the constrained pace
for such a considerable length of time, so that many of the knights,
having retrograded for one or two hundred yards, thought their vow was
sufficiently observed by having so far deferred to it, and riding in
the ordinary manner into the town, seized without farther ceremony on
some vessels, which, notwithstanding the orders of the Greek Emperor,
had been allowed to remain on the Asiatic side of the strait. Some less
able horsemen met with various accidents; for though it was a proverb
of the time, that nothing was so bold as a blind horse, yet from this
mode of equitation, where neither horse nor rider saw the way he was
going, some steeds were overthrown, others backed upon dangerous
obstacles; and the bones of the cavaliers themselves suffered much more
than would have been the case in an ordinary march.

Those horsemen, also, who met with falls, incurred the danger of being
slain by the Greeks, had not Godfrey, surmounting his religious
scruples, despatched a squadron to extricate them--a task which they
performed with great ease. The greater part of Tancred's followers
succeeded in embarking, as was intended, nor was there more than a
score or two finally amissing. To accomplish their voyage, however,
even the Prince of Otranto himself, and most of his followers, were
obliged to betake themselves to the unknightly labours of the oar. This
they found extremely difficult, as well from the state both of the tide
and the wind, as from the want of practice at the exercise. Godfrey in
person viewed their progress anxiously, from a neighbouring height, and
perceived with regret the difficulty which they found in making their
way, which was still more increased by the necessity for their keeping
in a body, and waiting for the slowest and worst manned vessels, which
considerably detained those that were more expeditious. They made some
progress, however; nor had the commander-in-chief the least doubt, that
before sunset they would safely reach the opposite side of the strait.

He retired at length from his post of observation, having placed a
careful sentinel in his stead, with directions to bring him word the
instant that the detachment reached the opposite shore. This the
soldier could easily discern by the eye, if it was daylight at the
time; if, on the contrary, it was night before they could arrive, the
Prince of Otranto had orders to show certain lights, which, in case of
their meeting resistance from the Greeks, should be arranged in a
peculiar manner, so as to indicate danger.

Godfrey then explained to the Greek authorities of Scutari, whom he
summoned before him, the necessity there was that he should keep in
readiness such vessels as could be procured, with which, in case of
need, he was determined to transport a strong division from his army to
support those who had gone before. He then rode back to his camp, the
confused murmurs of which, rendered more noisy by the various
discussions concerning the events of the day, rolled off from the
numerous host of the crusaders, and mingled with the hoarse sound of
the many-billowed Hellespont.




CHAPTER THE TWENTH-FOURTH.

     All is prepared--the chambers of the mine
     Are cramm'd with the combustible, which, harmless
     While yet unkindled, as the sable sand,
     Needs but a spark to change its nature so,
     That he who wakes it from its slumbrous mood,
     Dreads scarce the explosion less than he who knows
     That 'tis his towers which meet its fury.
                                     ANONYMOUS.


When the sky is darkened suddenly, and the atmosphere grows thick and
stifling, the lower ranks of creation entertain the ominous sense of a
coming tempest. The birds fly to the thickets, the wild creatures
retreat to the closest covers which their instinct gives them the habit
of frequenting, and domestic animals show their apprehension of the
approaching thunderstorm by singular actions and movements inferring
fear and disturbance.

It seems that human nature, when its original habits are cultivated and
attended to, possesses, on similar occasions, something of that
prescient foreboding, which announces the approaching tempest to the
inferior ranks of creation. The cultivation of our intellectual powers
goes perhaps too far, when it teaches us entirely to suppress and
disregard those natural feelings, which were originally designed as
sentinels by which nature warned us of impending danger.

Something of the kind, however, still remains, and that species of
feeling which announces to us sorrowful or alarming tidings, may be
said, like the prophecies of the weird sisters, to come over us like a
sudden cloud.

During the fatal day which was to precede the combat of the Caesar with
the Count of Paris, there were current through the city of
Constantinople the most contradictory, and at the same time the most
terrific reports. Privy conspiracy, it was alleged, was on the very eve
of breaking out; open war, it was reported by others, was about to
shake her banners over the devoted city; the precise cause was not
agreed upon, any more than the nature of the enemy. Some said that the
barbarians from the borders of Thracia, the Hungarians, as they were
termed, and the Comani, were on their march from the frontiers to
surprise the city; another report stated that the Turks, who, during
this period, were established in Asia, had resolved to prevent the
threatened attack of the crusaders upon Palestine, by surprising not
only the Western Pilgrims, but the Christians of the East, by one of
their innumerable invasions, executed with their characteristic
rapidity.

Another report, approaching more near to the truth, declared that the
crusaders themselves, having discovered their various causes of
complaint against Alexius Comnenus, had resolved to march back their
united forces to the capital, with a view of dethroning or chastising
him; and the citizens were dreadfully alarmed for the consequences of
the resentment of men so fierce in their habits and so strange in their
manners. In short, although they did not all agree on the precise cause
of danger, it was yet generally allowed that something of a dreadful
kind was impending, which appeared to be in a certain degree confirmed
by the motions that were taking place among the troops. The Varangians,
as well as the Immortals, were gradually assembled, and placed in
occupation of the strongest parts of the city, until at length the
fleet of galleys, row-boats, and transports, occupied by Tancred and
his party, were observed to put themselves in motion from Scutari, and
attempt to gain such a height in the narrow sea, as upon the turn of
the tide should transport them to the port of the capital.

Alexius Comnenus was himself struck at this unexpected movement on the
part of the crusaders. Yet, after some conversation with Hereward, on
whom he had determined to repose his confidence, and had now gone too
far to retreat, he became reassured, the more especially by the limited
size of the detachment which seemed to meditate so bold a measure as an
attack upon his capital. To those around him he said with carelessness,
that it was hardly to be supposed that a trumpet could blow to the
charge, within hearing of the crusaders' camp, without some out of so
many knights coming forth to see the cause and the issue of the
conflict.

The conspirators also had their secret fears when the little armament
of Tancred had been seen on the straits. Agelastes mounted a mule, and
went to the shore of the sea, at the place now called Galata. He met
Bertha's old ferryman, whom Godfrey had set at liberty, partly in
contempt, and partly that the report he was likely to make, might serve
to amuse the conspirators in the city. Closely examined by Agelastes,
he confessed that the present detachment, so far as he understood, was
despatched at the instance of Bohemond, and was under the command of
his kinsman Tancred, whose well-known banner was floating from the
headmost vessel. This gave courage to Agelastes, who, in the course of
his intrigues, had opened a private communication with the wily and
ever mercenary Prince of Antioch. The object of the philosopher had
been to obtain from Bohemond a body of his followers to co-operate in
the intended conspiracy, and fortify the party of insurgents. It is
true, that Bohemond had returned no answer, but the account now given
by the ferryman, and the sight of Tancred the kinsman of Bohemond's
banner displayed on the straits, satisfied the philosopher that his
offers, his presents, and his promises, had gained to his side the
avaricious Italian, and that this band had been selected by Bohemond,
and were coming to act in his favour.

As Agelastes turned to go off, he almost jostled a person, as much
muffled up, and apparently as unwilling to be known, as the philosopher
himself. Alexius Comnenus, however--for it was the Emperor
himself--knew Agelastes, though rather from his stature and gestures,
than his countenance; and could not forbear whispering in his ear, as
he passed, the well-known lines, to which the pretended sage's various
acquisitions gave some degree of point:--

    "Grammaticus, rhetor, geometres, pictor, aliptes,
     Augur, schoenobates, medicus, magus; omnia novit.
     Graeculus esuriens in caelum, jusseris, ibit." [Footnote: The
lines of Juvenal imitated by Johnson in his _London_--
    "All sciences a fasting Monsieur knows,
     And bid him go to hell--to hell he goes."]

Agelastes first started at the unexpected sound of the Emperor's voice,
yet immediately recovered presence of mind, the want of which had made
him suspect himself betrayed; and without taking notice of the rank of
the person to whom he spoke, he answered by a quotation which should
return the alarm he had received. The speech that suggested itself was
said to be that which the Phantom of Cleonice dinned into the ears of
the tyrant who murdered her:--

    "Tu cole justitiam; toque atque alios manet ultor." [Footnote: "Do
thou cultivate justice: for thee and for others there remains an
avenger."--_Ovid. Met._]

The sentence, and the recollections which accompanied it, thrilled
through the heart of the Emperor, who walked on, however, without any
notice or reply.

"The vile conspirator," he said, "had his associates around him,
otherwise he had not hazarded that threat. Or it may have been
worse--Agelastes himself, on the very brink of this world, may have
obtained that singular glance into futurity proper to that situation,
and perhaps speaks less from his own reflection than from a strange
spirit of prescience, which dictates his words. Have I then in earnest
sinned so far in my imperial duty, as to make it just to apply to me
the warning used by the injured Cleonice to her ravisher and murderer?
Methinks I have not. Methinks that at less expense than that of a just
severity, I could ill have kept my seat in the high place where Heaven
has been pleased to seat me, and where, as a ruler, I am bound to
maintain my station. Methinks the sum of those who have experienced my
clemency may be well numbered with that of such as have sustained the
deserved punishments of their guilt--But has that vengeance, however
deserved in itself, been always taken in a legal or justifiable manner?
My conscience, I doubt, will hardly answer so home a question; and
where is the man, had he the virtues of Antoninus himself, that can
hold so high and responsible a place, yet sustain such an interrogation
as is implied in that sort of warning which I have received from this
traitor? _Tu cole justitiam_--we all need to use justice to
others--_Teque atque alios manet ultor_--we are all amenable to an
avenging being--I will see the Patriarch--instantly will I see him; and
by confessing my transgressions to the Church, I will, by her plenary
indulgence, acquire the right of spending the last day of my reign in a
consciousness of innocence, or at least of pardon--a state of mind
rarely the lot of those whose lines have fallen in lofty places."

So saying, he passed to the palace of Zosimus the Patriarch, to whom he
could unbosom himself with more safety, because he had long considered
Agelastes as a private enemy to the Church, and a man attached to the
ancient doctrines of heathenism. In the councils of the state they were
also opposed to each other, nor did the Emperor doubt, that in
communicating the secret of the conspiracy to the Patriarch, he was
sure to attain a loyal and firm supporter in the defence which he
proposed to himself. He therefore gave a signal by a low whistle, and a
confidential officer, well mounted, approached him, who attended him in
his ride, though unostentatiously, and at some distance.

In this manner, therefore, Alexius Comnenus proceeded to the palace of
the Patriarch, with as much speed as was consistent with his purpose of
avoiding to attract any particular notice as he passed through the
street. During the whole ride, the warning of Agelastes repeatedly
occurred to him, and his conscience reminded him of too many actions of
his reign which could only be justified by necessity, emphatically said
to be the tyrant's plea, and which were of themselves deserving the
dire vengeance so long delayed.

When he came in sight of the splendid towers which adorned the front of
the patriarchal palace, he turned aside from the lofty gates, repaired
to a narrow court, and again giving his mule to his attendant, he stopt
before a postern, whose low arch and humble architrave seemed to
exclude the possibility of its leading to any place of importance. On
knocking, however, a priest of an inferior order opened the door, who,
with a deep reverence, received the Emperor so soon as he had made
himself known, and conducted him into the interior of the palace.
Demanding a secret interview with the Patriarch, Alexius was then
ushered into his private library, where he was received by the aged
priest with the deepest respect, which the nature of his communication
soon changed into horror and astonishment.

Although Alexius was supposed by many of his own court, and
particularly by some members of his own family, to be little better
than a hypocrite in his religious professions, yet such severe
observers were unjust in branding him with a name so odious. He was
indeed aware of the great support which he received from the good
opinion of the clergy, and to them he was willing to make sacrifices
for the advantage of the Church, or of individual prelates who
manifested fidelity to the crown; but though, on the one hand, such
sacrifices were rarely made by Alexius, without a view to temporal
policy, yet, on the other, he regarded them as recommended by his
devotional feelings, and took credit to himself for various grants and
actions, as dictated by sincere piety, which, in another aspect, were
the fruits of temporal policy. His mode of looking on these measures
was that of a person with oblique vision, who sees an object in a
different manner, according to the point from which he chances to
contemplate it.

The Emperor placed his own errors of government before the Patriarch in
his confession, giving due weight to every branch of morality as it
occurred, and stripping from them the lineaments and palliative
circumstances which had in his own imagination lessened their guilt.
The Patriarch heard, to his astonishment, the real thread of many a
court intrigue, which had borne a very different appearance, till the
Emperor's narrative either justified his conduct upon the occasion, or
left it totally unjustifiable. Upon the whole, the balance was
certainly more in favour of Alexius than the Patriarch had supposed
likely in that more distant view he had taken of the intrigues of the
court, when, as usual, the ministers and the courtiers endeavoured to
make up for the applause which they had given in council in the most
blameable actions of the absolute monarch, by elsewhere imputing to his
motives greater guilt than really belonged to them. Many men who had
fallen sacrifices, it was supposed to the personal spleen or jealousy
of the Emperor, appeared to have been in fact removed from life, or
from liberty, because their enjoying either was inconsistent with the
quiet of the state and the safety of the monarch.

Zosimus also learned, what he perhaps already suspected, that amidst
the profound silence of despotism which seemed to pervade the Grecian
empire, it heaved frequently with convulsive throes, which ever and
anon made obvious the existence of a volcano under the surface. Thus,
while smaller delinquencies, or avowed discontent with the Imperial
government, seldom occurred, and were severely punished when they did,
the deepest and most mortal conspiracies against the life and the
authority of the Emperor were cherished by those nearest to his person;
and he was often himself aware of them, though it was not until they
approached an explosion that he dared act upon his knowledge, and
punish the conspirators.

The whole treason of the Caesar, with his associates, Agelastes and
Achilles Tatius, was heard by the Patriarch with wonder and
astonishment, and he was particularly surprised at the dexterity with
which the Emperor, knowing the existence of so dangerous a conspiracy
at home, had been able to parry the danger from the crusaders occurring
at the same moment.

"In that respect," said the Emperor, to whom indeed the churchman
hinted his surprise, "I have been singularly unfortunate. Had I been
secure of the forces of my own empire, I might have taken one out of
two manly and open courses with these frantic warriors of the west--I
might, my reverend father, have devoted the sums paid to Bohemond and
other of the more selfish among the crusaders, to the honest and open
support of the army of western Christians, and safely transported them
to Palestine, without exposing them to the great loss which they are
likely to sustain by the opposition of the Infidels; their success
would have been in fact my own, and a Latin kingdom in Palestine,
defended by its steel-clad warriors, would have been a safe and
unexpugnable barrier of the empire against the Saracens, Or, if it was
thought more expedient for the protection of the empire and the holy
Church, over which you are ruler, we might at once, and by open force,
have defended the frontiers of our states, against a host commanded by
so many different and discording chiefs, and advancing upon us with
such equivocal intentions. If the first swarm of these locusts, under
him whom they called Walter the Penniless, was thinned by the
Hungarians, and totally destroyed by the Turks, as the pyramids of
bones on the frontiers of the country still keep in memory, surely the
united forces of the Grecian empire would have had little difficulty in
scattering this second flight, though commanded by these Godfreys,
Bohemonds, and Tancreds."

The Patriarch was silent, for though he disliked, or rather detested
the crusaders, as members of the Latin Church, he yet thought it highly
doubtful that in feats of battle they could have been met and overcome
by the Grecian forces.

"At any rate," said Alexius, rightly interpreting his silence, "if
vanquished, I had fallen under my shield as a Greek emperor should, nor
had I been forced into these mean measures of attacking men by stealth,
and with forces disguised as infidels; while the lives of the faithful
soldiers of the empire, who have fallen in obscure skirmishes, had
better, both for them and me, been lost bravely in their ranks,
avowedly fighting for their native emperor and their native country.
Now, and as the matter stands, I shall be handed down to posterity as a
wily tyrant, who engaged his subjects in fatal feuds for the safety of
his own obscure life. Patriarch! these crimes rest not with me, but
with the rebels whose intrigues compelled me into such courses--What,
reverend father, will be my fate hereafter?--and in what light shall I
descend to posterity, the author of so many disasters?"

"For futurity," said the Patriarch, "your grace hath referred yourself
to the holy Church, which hath power to bind and loose; your means of
propitiating her are ample, and I have already indicated such as she
may reasonably expect, in consequence of your repentance and
forgiveness."

"They shall be granted," replied the Emperor, "in their fullest extent;
nor will I injure you in doubting their effect in the next world. In
this present state of existence, however, the favourable opinion of the
Church may do much for me during this important crisis. If we
understand each other, good Zosimus, her doctors and bishops are to
thunder in my behalf, nor is my benefit from her pardon, to be deferred
till the funeral monument closes upon me?"

"Certainly not," said Zosimus; "the conditions which I have already
stipulated being strictly attended to."

"And my memory in history," said Alexius, "in what manner is that to be
preserved?"

"For that," answered the Patriarch, "your Imperial Majesty must trust
to the filial piety and literary talents of your accomplished daughter,
Anna Comnena."

The Emperor shook his head. "This unhappy Caesar," he said, "is like to
make a quarrel between us; for I shall scarce pardon so ungrateful a
rebel as he is, because my daughter clings to him with a woman's
fondness. Besides, good Zosimus, it is not, I believe, the page of a
historian such as my daughter that is most likely to be received
without challenge by posterity. Some Procopius, some philosophical
slave, starving in a garret, aspires to write the life of an Emperor
whom he durst not approach; and although the principal merit of his
production be, that it contains particulars upon the subject which no
man durst have promulgated while the prince was living, yet no man
hesitates to admit such as true when he has passed from the scene."

"On that subject," said Zosimus, "I can neither afford your Imperial
Majesty relief or protection. If, however, your memory is unjustly
slandered upon earth, it will be a matter of indifference to your
Highness, who will be then, I trust, enjoying a state of beatitude
which idle slander cannot assail. The only way, indeed, to avoid it
while on this side of time, would be to write your Majesty's own
memoirs while you are yet in the body; so convinced am I that it is in
your power to assign legitimate excuses for those actions of your life,
which, without your doing so, would seem most worthy of censure."

"Change we the subject," said the Emperor; "and since the danger is
imminent, let us take care for the present, and leave future ages to
judge for themselves.--What circumstance is it, reverend father, in
your opinion, which encourages these conspirators to make so audacious
an appeal to the populace and the Grecian soldiers?"

"Certainly," answered the Patriarch, "the most irritating incident of
your highness's reign was the fate of Ursel, who, submitting, it is
said, upon capitulation, for life, limb, and liberty, was starved to
death by your orders, in the dungeons of the Blacquernal, and whose
courage, liberality, and other popular virtues, are still fondly
remembered by the citizens of this metropolis, and by the soldiers of
the guard, called Immortal."

"And this," said the Emperor, fixing his eye upon his confessor, "your
reverence esteems actually the most dangerous point of the popular
tumult?"

"I cannot doubt," said the Patriarch, "that his very name, boldly
pronounced, and artfully repeated, will be the watchword, as has been
plotted, of a horrible tumult."

"I thank Heaven!" said the Emperor; "on that particular I will be on my
guard. Good-night to your reverence! and, believe me, that all in this
scroll, to which I have set my hand, shall be with the utmost fidelity
accomplished. Be not, however, over-impatient in this business;--such a
shower of benefits falling at once upon the Church, would make men
suspicious that the prelates and ministers proceeded rather as acting
upon a bargain between the Emperor and Patriarch, than as paying or
receiving an atonement offered by a sinner in excuse of his crimes.
This would be injurious, father, both to yourself and me."

"All regular delay," said the Patriarch, "shall be interposed at your
highness's pleasure; and we shall trust to you for recollection that
the bargain, if it could be termed one, was of your own seeking, and
that the benefit to the Church was contingent upon the pardon and the
support which she has afforded to your majesty."

"True," said the Emperor--"most true--nor shall I forget it. Once more
adieu, and forget not what I have told thee. This is a night, Zosimus,
in which the Emperor must toil like a slave, if he means not to return
to the humble Alexius Comnenus, and even then there were no
resting-place."

So saying, he took leave of the Patriarch, who was highly gratified
with the advantages he had obtained for the Church, which many of his
predecessors had struggled for in vain. He resolved, therefore, to
support the staggering Alexius.




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FIFTH.

     Heaven knows its time; the bullet has its billet,
     Arrow and javelin each its destined purpose;
     The fated beasts of Nature's lower strain
     Have each their separate task.
                                            OLD PLAY.


Agelastes, after crossing the Emperor in the manner we have already
described, and after having taken such measures as occurred to him to
ensure the success of the conspiracy, returned to the lodge of his
garden, where the lady of the Count of Paris still remained, her only
companion being an old woman named Vexhelia, the wife of the soldier
who accompanied Bertha to the camp of the Crusaders; the kind-hearted
maiden having stipulated that, during her absence, her mistress was not
to be left without an attendant, and that attendant connected with the
Varangian guard. He had been all day playing the part of the ambitious
politician, the selfish time-server, the dark and subtle conspirator;
and now it seemed, as if to exhaust the catalogue of his various parts
in the human drama, he chose to exhibit himself in the character of the
wily sophist, and justify, or seem to justify, the arts by which he had
risen to wealth and eminence, and hoped even now to arise to royalty
itself.

"Fair Countess," he said, "what occasion is there for your wearing this
veil of sadness over a countenance so lovely?"

"Do you suppose me," said Brenhilda, "a stock, or stone, or a creature
without the feelings of a sensitive being, that I should endure
mortification, imprisonment, danger and distress, without expressing
the natural feelings of humanity? Do you imagine that to a lady like
me, as free as the unreclaimed falcon, you can offer the insult of
captivity, without my being sensible to the disgrace, or incensed
against the authors of it? And dost thou think that I will receive
consolation at thy hands--at thine--one of the most active artificers
in this web of treachery in which I am so basely entangled?"

"Not entangled certainly by my means"--answered Agelastes; "clap your
hands, call for what you wish, and the slave who refuses instant
obedience had better been unborn. Had I not, with reference to your
safety and your honour, agreed for a short time to be your keeper, that
office would have been usurped by the Caesar, whose object you know,
and may partly guess the modes by which it would be pursued. Why then
dost thou childishly weep at being held for a short space in an
honourable restraint, which the renowned arms of your husband will
probably put an end to long ere to-morrow at noon?"

"Canst thou not comprehend," said the Countess, "thou man of many
words, but of few honourable thoughts, that a heart like mine, which
has been trained in the feelings of reliance upon my own worth and
valour, must be necessarily affected with shame at being obliged to
accept, even from the sword of a husband, that safety which I would
gladly have owed only to my own?"

"Thou art misled, Countess," answered the philosopher, "by thy pride, a
failing predominant in woman. Thinkest thou there has been no offensive
assumption in laving aside the character of a mother and a wife, and
adopting that of one of those brain-sick female fools, who, like the
bravoes of the other sex, sacrifice every thing that is honourable or
useful to a frantic and insane affectation of courage? Believe me, fair
lady, that the true system of virtue consists in filling thine own
place gracefully in society, breeding up thy children, and delighting
those of the other sex, and any thing beyond this, may well render thee
hateful or terrible, but can add nothing to thy amiable qualities."

"Thou pretendest," said the Countess, "to be a philosopher; methinks
thou shouldst know, that the fame which hangs its chaplet on the tomb
of a brave hero or heroine, is worth all the petty engagements in which
ordinary persons spend the current of their time. One hour of life,
crowded to the full with glorious action, and filled with noble risks,
is worth whole years of those mean observances of paltry decorum, in
which men steal through existence, like sluggish waters through a
marsh, without either honour or observation."

"Daughter," said Agelastes, approaching near to the lady, "it is with
pain I see you bewildered in errors which a little calm reflection
might remove. We may flatter ourselves, and human vanity usually does
so, that beings infinitely more powerful than those belonging to mere
humanity, are employed daily in measuring out the good and evil of this
world, the termination of combats, or the fate of empires, according to
their own ideas of what is right or wrong, or, more properly, according
to what we ourselves conceive to be such. The Greek heathens, renowned
for their wisdom, and glorious for their actions, explained to men of
ordinary minds the supposed existence of Jupiter and his Pantheon,
where various deities presided over various virtues and vices, and
regulated the temporal fortune and future happiness of such as
practised them. The more learned and wise of the ancients rejected such
the vulgar interpretation, and wisely, although affecting a deference
to the public faith, denied before their disciples in private, the
gross fallacies of Tartarus and Olympus, the vain doctrines concerning
the gods themselves, and the extravagant expectations which the vulgar
entertained of an immortality, supposed to be possessed by creatures
who were in every respect mortal, both in the conformation of their
bodies, and in the internal belief of their souls. Of these wrise and
good men some granted the existence of the supposed deities, but denied
that they cared about the actions of mankind any more than those of the
inferior animals. A merry, jovial, careless life, such as the followers
of Epicurus would choose for themselves, was what they assigned for
those gods whose being they admitted. Others, more bold or more
consistent, entirely denied the existence of deities who apparently had
no proper object or purpose, and believed that such of them, whose
being and attributes were proved to us by no supernatural appearances,
had in reality no existence whatever."

"Stop, wretch!" said the Countess, "and know that thou speakest not to
one of those blinded heathens, of whose abominable doctrines you are
detailing the result. Know, that if an erring, I am nevertheless a
sincere daughter of the Church, and this cross displayed on my
shoulder, is a sufficient emblem of the vows I have undertaken in its
cause. Bo therefore wary, as thou art wily; for, believe me, if thou
scoffest or utterest reproach against my holy religion, what I am
unable to answer in language, I will reply to, without hesitation, with
the point of my dagger."

"To that argument" said Agelastes, drawing back from the neighbourhood
of Brenhilda, "believe me, fair lady, I am very willing to urge your
gentleness. But although I shall not venture to say any thing of those
superior and benevolent powers to whom you ascribe the management of
the world, you will surely not take offence at my noticing those base
superstitions which have been adopted in explanation of what is called
by the Magi, the Evil Principle. Was there ever received into a human
creed, a being so mean--almost so ridiculous--as the Christian Satan? A
goatish figure and limbs, with grotesque features, formed to express
the most execrable passions; a degree of power scarce inferior to that
of the Deity; and a talent at the same time scarce equal to that of the
stupidest of the lowest order! What is he, this being, who is at least
the second arbiter of the human race, save an immortal spirit, with the
petty spleen and spite of a vindictive old man or old woman?"

Agelastes made a singular pause in this part of his discourse. A mirror
of considerable size hung in the apartment, so that the philosopher
could see in its reflection the figure of Brenhilda, and remark the
change of her countenance, though she had averted her face from him in
hatred of the doctrines which he promulgated. On this glass the
philosopher had his eyes naturally fixed, and he was confounded at
perceiving a figure glide from behind the shadow of a curtain, and
glare at him with the supposed mien and expression of the Satan of
monkish mythology, or a satyr of the heathen age.

"Man!" said Brenhilda, whose attention was attracted by this
extraordinary apparition, as it seemed, of the fiend, "have thy wicked
words, and still more wicked thoughts, brought the devil amongst us? If
so, dismiss him instantly, else, by Our Lady of the Broken Lances! thou
shalt know better than at present, what is the temper of a Frankish
maiden, when in presence of the fiend himself, and those who pretend
skill to raise him! I wish not to enter into a contest unless
compelled; but if I am obliged to join battle with an enemy so
horrible, believe me, no one shall say that Brenildha feared him."

Agelastes, after looking with surprise and horror at the figure as
reflected in the glass, turned back his head to examine the substance,
of which the reflection was so strange. The object, however, had
disappeared behind the curtain, under which it probably lay hid, and it
was after a minute or two that the half-gibing, half-scowling
countenance showed itself again in the same position in the mirror.

"By the gods!" said Agelastes--

"In whom but now," said the Countess, "you professed unbelief."

"By the gods!" repeated Agelastes, in part recovering himself, "it is
Sylvan! that singular mockery of humanity, who was said to have been
brought from Taprobana. I warrant he also believes in his jolly god
Pan, or the veteran Sylvanus. He is to the uninitiated a creature whose
appearance is full of terrors, but he shrinks before the philosopher
like ignorance before knowledge." So saying, he with one hand pulled
down the curtain, under which the animal had nestled itself when it
entered from the garden-window of the pavilion, and with the other, in
which he had a staff uplifted, threatened to chastise the creature,
with the words,--"How now, Sylvanus! what insolence is this?--To your
place!"

As, in uttering these words, he struck the animal, the blow unluckily
lighted upon his wounded hand, and recalled its bitter smart. The wild
temper of the creature returned, unsubdued for the moment by any awe of
man; uttering a fierce, and, at the same time, stifled cry, it flew on
the philosopher, and clasped its strong and sinewy arms about his
throat with the utmost fury. The old man twisted and struggled to
deliver himself from the creature's grasp, but in vain. Sylvan kept
hold of his prize, compressed his sinewy arms, and abode by his purpose
of not quitting his hold of the philosopher's throat till he had
breathed his last. Two more bitter yells, accompanied each with a
desperate contortion of the countenance, and squeeze of the hands,
concluded, in less than five minutes, the dreadful strife. Agelastes
lay dead upon the ground, and his assassin Sylvan, springing from the
body as if terrified and alarmed at what he had done, made his escape
by the window. The Countess stood in astonishment, not knowing exactly
whether she had witnessed a supernatural display of the judgment of
Heaven, or an instance of its vengeance by mere mortal means. Her new
attendant Vexhelia was no less astonished, though her acquaintance with
the animal was considerably more intimate.

"Lady," she said, "that gigantic creature is an animal of great
strength, resembling mankind in form, but huge in its size, and,
encouraged by its immense power, sometimes malevolent in its
intercourse with mortals. I have heard the Varangians often talk of it
as belonging to the Imperial museum. It is fitting we remove the body
of this unhappy man, and hide it in a plot of shrubbery in the garden.
It is not likely that he will be missed to-night, and to-morrow there
will be other matter astir, which will probably prevent much enquiry
about him." The Countess Brenhilda assented, for she was not one of
those timorous females to whom the countenances of the dead are objects
of terror.

Trusting to the parole which she had given, Agelastes had permitted the
Countess and her attendant the freedom of his gardens, of that part at
least adjacent to the pavilion. They therefore were in little risk of
interruption as they bore forth the dead body between them, and without
much trouble disposed of it in the thickest part of one of the bosquets
with which the garden was studded.

As they returned to their place of abode or confinement, the Countess,
half speaking to herself, half addressing Vexhelia, said, "I am sorry
for this; not that the infamous wretch did not deserve the full
punishment of Heaven coming upon him in the very moment of blasphemy
and infidelity, but because the courage and truth of the unfortunate
Brenhilda may be brought into suspicion, as his slaughter took place
when he was alone with her and her attendant, and as no one was witness
of the singular manner in which the old blasphemer met his end.--Thou
knowest," she added, addressing herself to Heaven--"thou! blessed Lady
of the Broken Lances, the protectress both of Brenhilda and her
husband, well knowest, that whatever faults may be mine, I am free from
the slightest suspicion of treachery; and into thy hands I put my
cause, with a perfect reliance upon thy wisdom and bounty to bear
evidence in my favour." So saying, they returned to the lodge unseen,
and with pious and submissive prayers, the Countess closed that
eventful evening.




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SIXTH.

     Will you hear of a Spanish lady,
     How she wooed an Englishman?
     Garments gay, as rich as may be,
     Deck'd with jewels she had on.
     Of a comely countenance and grace was she,
     And by birth and parentage of high degree.
                                     OLD BALLAD.


We left Alexius Comnenus after he had unloaded his conscience in the
ears of the Patriarch, and received from him a faithful assurance of
the pardon and patronage of the national Church. He took leave of the
dignitary with some exulting exclamations, so unexplicitly expressed,
however, that it was by no means easy to conceive the meaning of what
he said. His first enquiry, when he reached the Blacquernal, being for
his daughter, he was directed to the room encrusted with beautifully
carved marble, from which she herself, and many of her race, derived
the proud appellation of _Porphyrogenita_, or born in the purple. Her
countenance was clouded with anxiety, which, at the sight of her
father, broke out into open and uncontrollable grief.

"Daughter," said the Emperor, with a harshness little common to his
manner, and a seriousness which he sternly maintained, instead of
sympathizing with his daughter's affliction, "as you would prevent the
silly fool with whom you are connected, from displaying himself to the
public both as an ungrateful monster and a traitor, you will not fail
to exhort him, by due submission, to make his petition for pardon,
accompanied with a full confession of his crimes, or, by my sceptre and
my crown, he shall die the death! Nor will I pardon any who rushes upon
his doom in an open tone of defiance, under such a standard of
rebellion as my ungrateful son-in-law has hoisted.

"What can you require of me, father?" said the Princess. "Can you
expect that I am to dip my own hands in the blood of this unfortunate
man; or wilt thou seek a revenge yet more bloody than that which was
exacted by the deities of antiquity, upon those criminals who offended
against their divine power?"

"Think not so, my daughter!" said the Emperor; "but rather believe that
thou hast the last opportunity afforded by my filial affection, of
rescuing, perhaps from death, that silly fool thy husband, who has so
richly deserved it."

"My father," said the Princess, "God knows it is not at your risk that
I would wish to purchase the life of Nicephorus; but he has been the
father of my children, though they are now no more, and women cannot
forget that such a tie has existed, even though it has been broken by
fate. Permit me only to hope that the unfortunate culprit shall have an
opportunity of retrieving his errors; nor shall it, believe me, be my
fault, if he resumes those practices, treasonable at once, and
unnatural, by which his life is at present endangered."

"Follow me, then, daughter," said the Emperor, "and know, that to thee
alone I am about to intrust a secret, upon which the safety of my life
and crown, as well as the pardon of my son-in-law's life, will be found
eventually to depend."

He then assumed in haste the garment of a slave of the Seraglio, and
commanded his daughter to arrange her dress in a more succinct form,
and to take in her hand a lighted lamp.

"Whither are we going, my father?" said Anna Comnena.

"It matters not," replied her father, "since my destiny calls me, and
since thine ordains thee to be my torch-bearer. Believe it, and record
it, if thou darest, in thy book, that Alexius Comnenus does not,
without alarm, descend into those awful dungeons--which his
predecessors built for men, even when his intentions are innocent, and
free from harm.--Be silent, and should we meet any inhabitant of those
inferior regions, speak not a word nor make any observation upon his
appearance."

Passing through the intricate apartments of the palace, they now came
to that large hall through which Hereward had passed on the first night
of his introduction to the place of Anna's recitation called the Temple
of the Muses. It was constructed, as we have said, of black marble,
dimly illuminated. At the upper end of the apartment was a small altar,
on which was laid some incense, while over the smoke was suspended, as
if projecting from the wall, two imitations of human hands and arms,
which were but imperfectly seen.

At the bottom of this hall, a small iron door led to a narrow and
winding staircase, resembling a draw-well in shape and size, the steps
of which were excessively steep, and which the Emperor, after a solemn
gesture to his daughter commanding her attendance, began to descend
with the imperfect light, and by the narrow and difficult steps by
which those who visited the under regions of the Blacquernal seemed to
bid adieu to the light of day. Door after door they passed in their
descent, leading, it was probable, to different ranges of dungeons,
from which was obscurely heard the stifled voice of groans and sighs,
such as attracted Hereward's attention on a former occasion. The
Emperor took no notice of these signs of human misery, and three
stories or ranges of dungeons had been already passed, ere the father
and daughter arrived at the lowest story of the building, the base of
which was the solid rock, roughly carved, upon which were erected the
side-walls and arches of solid but unpolished marble.

"Here," said Alexius Comnenus, "all hope, all expectation takes
farewell, at the turn of a hinge or the grating of a lock. Yet shall
not this be always the case--the dead shall revive and resume their
right, and the disinherited of these regions shall again prefer their
claim to inhabit the upper world. If I cannot entreat Heaven to my
assistance, be assured, my daughter, that rather than be the poor
animal which I have stooped to be thought, and even to be painted in
thy history, I would sooner brave every danger of the multitude which
now erect themselves betwixt me and safety. Nothing is resolved save
that I will live and die an Emperor; and thou, Anna, be assured, that
if there is power in the beauty or in the talents, of which so much has
been boasted, that power shall be this evening exercised to the
advantage of thy parent, from whom it is derived."

"What is it that you mean, Imperial father?--Holy Virgin! is this the
promise you made me to save the life of the unfortunate Nicephorus?"

"And so I will," said the Emperor; "and I am now about that action of
benevolence. But think not I will once more warm in my bosom the
household snake which had so nearly stung me to death. No, daughter, I
have provided for thee a fitting husband, in one who is able to
maintain and defend the rights of the Emperor thy father;--and beware
how thou opposest an obstacle to what is my pleasure! for behold these
walls of marble, though unpolished, and recollect it is as possible to
die within the marble as to be born there."

The Princess Anna Comnena was frightened at seeing her father in a
state of mind entirely different from any which she had before
witnessed. "O, heaven! that my mother were here!" she ejaculated, in
the terror of something she hardly knew what.

"Anna," said the Emperor, "your fears and your screams are alike in
vain. I am one of those, who, on ordinary occasions, hardly nourish a
wish of my own, and account myself obliged to those who, like my wife
and daughter, take care to save me all the trouble of free judgment.
But when the vessel is among the breakers, and the master is called to
the helm, believe that no meaner hand shall be permitted to interfere
with him, nor will the wife and daughter, whom he indulged in
prosperity, be allowed to thwart his will while he can yet call it his
own. Thou couldst scarcely fail to understand that I was almost
prepared to have given thee, as a mark of my sincerity, to yonder
obscure Varangian, without asking question of either birth or blood.
Thou mayst hear when I next promise thee to a three years' inhabitant
of these vaults, who shall be Caesar in Briennius's stead, if I can
move him to accept a princess for his bride, and an imperial crown for
his inheritance, in place of a starving dungeon."

"I tremble at your words, father," said Anna Comnena; "how canst thou
trust a man who has felt thy cruelty?--How canst thou dream that aught
can ever in sincerity reconcile thee to one whom thou hast deprived of
his eyesight?"

"Care not for that," said Alexius; "he becomes mine, or he shall never
know what it is to be again his own.--And thou, girl, mayst rest
assured that, if I will it, thou art next day the bride of my present
captive, or thou retirest to the most severe nunnery, never again to
mix with society. Be silent, therefore, and await thy doom, as it shall
come, and hope not that thy utmost endeavours can avert the current of
thy destiny."

As he concluded this singular dialogue, in which he had assumed a tone
to which his daughter was a stranger, and before which she trembled, he
passed on through more than one strictly fastened door, while his
daughter, with a faltering step, illuminated him on the obscure road.
At length he found admittance by another passage into the cell in which
Ursel was confined, and found him reclining in hopeless misery,--all
those expectations having faded from his heart which the Count of Paris
had by his indomitable gallantry for a time excited. He turned his
sightless eyes towards the place where he heard the moving of bolts and
the approach of steps.

"A new feature," he said, "in my imprisonment--a man comes with a heavy
and determined step, and a woman or a child with one that scarcely
presses the floor!--is it my death that you bring?--Believe me, that I
have lived long enough in these dungeons to bid my doom welcome."

"It is not thy death, noble Ursel," said the Emperor, in a voice
somewhat disguised. Life, liberty, whatever the world has to give, is
placed by the Emperor Alexius at the feet of his noble enemy, and he
trusts that many years of happiness and power, together with the
command of a large share of the empire, will soon obliterate the
recollection of the dungeons of the Blacquernal."

"It cannot be," said Ursel, with a sigh. "He upon whose eyes the sun
has set even at middle day, can have nothing left to hope from the most
advantageous change of circumstances."

"You are not entirely assured of that," said the Emperor; "allow us to
convince you that what is intended towards you is truly favourable and
liberal, and I hope you will be rewarded by finding that there is more
possibility of amendment in your case, than your first apprehensions
are willing to receive. Make an effort, and try whether your eyes are
not sensible of the light of the lamp."

"Do with, me," said Ursel, "according to your pleasure; I have neither
strength to remonstrate, nor the force of mind equal to make me set
your cruelty at defiance. Of something like light I am sensible; but
whether it is reality or illusion, I cannot determine. If you are come
to deliver me from this living sepulchre, I pray God to requite you;
and if, under such deceitful pretence, you mean to take my life, I can
only commend my soul to Heaven, and the vengeance due to my death to
Him who can behold the darkest places in which injustice can shroud
itself."

So saying, and the revulsion of his spirits rendering him unable to
give almost any other signs of existence, Ursel sunk back upon his seat
of captivity, and spoke not another word during the time that Alexius
disembarrassed him of those chains which had so long hung about him,
that they almost seemed to make a part of his person.

"This is an affair in which thy aid can scarce be sufficient, Anna,"
said the Emperor; "it would have been well if you and I could have
borne him into the open air by our joint strength, for there is little
wisdom in showing the secrets of this prison-house to those to whom
they are not yet known; nevertheless, go, my child, and at a short
distance from the head of the staircase which we descended, thou wilt
find Edward, the bold and trusty Varangian, who on your communicating
to him my orders, will come hither and render his assistance; and see
that you send also the experienced leech, Douban." Terrified,
half-stifled, and half struck with horror, the lady yet felt a degree
of relief from the somewhat milder tone in which her father addressed
her. With tottering steps, yet in some measure encouraged by the tenor
of her instructions, she ascended the staircase which yawned upon these
infernal dungeons. As she approached the top, a large and strong figure
threw its broad shadow between the lamp and the opening of the hall.
Frightened nearly to death at the thoughts of becoming the wife of a
squalid wretch like Ursel, a moment of weakness seized upon the
Princess's mind, and, when she considered the melancholy option which
her father had placed before her, she could not but think that the
handsome and gallant Varangian, who had already rescued the royal
family from such imminent danger, was a fitter person with whom to
unite herself, if she must needs make a second choice, than the
singular and disgusting being whom her father's policy had raked from
the bottom of the Blacquernal dungeons.

I will not say of poor Anna Comnena, who was a timid but not an
unfeeling woman, that she would have embraced such a proposal, had not
the life of her present husband Nicephorus Briennius been in extreme
danger; and it was obviously the determination of the Emperor, that if
he spared him, it should be on the sole condition of unloosing his
daughter's hand, and binding her to some one of better faith, and
possessed of a greater desire to prove an affectionate son-in-law.
Neither did the plan of adopting the Varangian as a second husband,
enter decidedly into the mind of the Princess. The present was a moment
of danger, in which her rescue to be successful must be sudden, and
perhaps, if once achieved, the lady might have had an opportunity of
freeing herself both from Ursel and the Varangian, without disjoining
either of them from her father's assistance, or of herself losing it.
At any rate, the surest means of safety were to secure, if possible,
the young soldier, whose features and appearance were of a kind which
rendered the task no way disagreeable to a beautiful woman. The schemes
of conquest are so natural to the fair sex, and the whole idea passed
so quickly through Anna Comnena's mind, that having first entered while
the soldier's shadow was interposed between her and the lamp, it had
fully occupied her quick imagination, when, with deep reverence and
great surprise at her sudden appearance on the ladder of Acheron, the
Varangian advancing, knelt down, and lent his arm to the assistance of
the fair lady, in order to help her out of the dreary staircase.

"Dearest Hereward," said the lady, with a degree of intimacy which
seemed unusual, "how much do I rejoice, in this dreadful night, to have
fallen under your protection! I have been in places which the spirit of
hell appears to have contrived for the human race." The alarm of the
Princess, the familiarity of a beautiful woman, who, while in mortal
fear, seeks refuge, like a frightened dove, in the bosom of the strong
and the brave, must be the excuse of Anna Comnena for the tender
epithet with which she greeted Hereward; nor, if he had chosen to
answer in the same tone, which, faithful as he was, might have proved
the case if the meeting had chanced before he saw Bertha, would the
daughter of Alexius have been, to say the truth, irreconcilably
offended. Exhausted as she was, she suffered herself to repose upon,
the broad breast and shoulder of the Anglo-Saxon; nor did she make an
attempt to recover herself, although the decorum of her sex and station
seemed to recommend such an exertion. Hereward was obliged himself to
ask her, with the unimpassioned and reverential demeanour of a private
soldier to a princess, whether he ought to summon her female
attendants? to which she faintly uttered a negative. "No, no," said
she, "I have a duty to execute for my father, and I must not summon
eye-witnesses;--he knows me to be in safety, Hereward, since he knows I
am with thee; and if I am a burden to you in my present state of
weakness, I shall soon recover, if you will set me down upon the marble
steps."

"Heaven forbid, lady," said Hereward, "that I were thus neglectful of
your Highness's gracious health! I see your two young ladies, Astarte
and Violante, are in quest of you--Permit me to summon them hither, and
I will keep watch upon you, if you are unable to retire to your
chamber, where, methinks, the present disorder of your nerves will be
most properly treated."

"Do as thou wilt, barbarian," said the Princess, rallying herself, with
a certain degree of pique, arising perhaps from her not thinking more
_dramatis personae_ were appropriate to the scene, than the two who
were already upon the stage. Then, as if for the first time, appearing
to recollect the message with which she had been commissioned, she
exhorted the Varangian to repair instantly to her father.

On such occasions, the slightest circumstances have their effect on the
actors. The Anglo-Saxon was sensible that the Princess was somewhat
offended, though whether she was so, on account of her being actually
in Hereward's arms, or whether the cause of her anger was the being
nearly discovered there by the two young maidens, the sentinel did not
presume to guess, but departed for the gloomy vaults to join Alexius,
with the never-failing double-edged axe, the bane of many a Turk,
glittering upon his shoulder.

Astarte and her companion had been despatched by the Empress Irene in
search of Anna Comnena, through those apartments of the palace which
she was wont to inhabit. The daughter of Alexius could nowhere be
found, although the business on which they were seeking her was
described by the Empress as of the most pressing nature. Nothing,
however, in a palace, passes altogether unespied, so that the Empress's
messengers at length received information that their mistress and the
Emperor had been seen to descend that gloomy access to the dungeons,
which, by allusion to the classical infernal regions, was termed the
Pit of Acheron. They came thither, accordingly, and we have related the
consequences. Hereward thought it necessary to say that her Imperial
Highness had swooned upon being suddenly brought into the upper air.
The Princess, on the other part, briskly shook off her juvenile
attendants, and declared herself ready to proceed to the chamber of her
mother. The obeisance which she made Hereward at parting, had something
in it of haughtiness, yet evidently qualified by a look of friendship
and regard. As she passed an apartment in which some of the royal
slaves were in waiting, she addressed to one of them, an old
respectable man, of medical skill, a private and hurried order,
desiring him to go to the assistance of her father, whom he would find
at the bottom of the staircase called the Pit of Acheron, and to take
his scimitar along with him. To hear, as usual, was to obey, and
Douban, for that was his name, only replied by that significant sign
which indicates immediate acquiescence. In the meantime, Anna Comnena
herself hastened onward to her mother's apartments, in which she found
the Empress alone.

"Go hence, maidens," said Irene, "and do not let any one have access to
these apartments, even if the Emperor himself should command it. Shut
the door," she said, "Anna Comnena; and if the jealousy of the stronger
sex do not allow us the masculine privileges of bolts and bars, to
secure the insides of our apartments, let us avail ourselves, as
quickly as may be, of such opportunities as are permitted us; and
remember, Princess, that however implicit your duty to your father, it
is yet more so to me, who am of the same sex with thyself, and may
truly call thee, even according to the letter, blood of my blood, and
bone of my bone. Be assured thy father knows not, at this moment, the
feelings of a woman. Neither he nor any man alive can justly conceive
the pangs of the heart which beats under a woman's robe. These men,
Anna, would tear asunder without scruple the tenderest ties of
affection, the whole structure of domestic felicity, in which lie a
woman's cares, her joy, her pain, her love, and her despair. Trust,
therefore, to me, my daughter, and believe me, I will at once save thy
father's crown and thy happiness. The conduct of thy husband has been
wrong, most cruelly wrong; but, Anna, he is a man--and in calling him
such, I lay to his charge, as natural frailties, thoughtless treachery,
wanton infidelity, every species of folly and inconsistency, to which
his race is subject. You ought not, therefore, to think of his faults,
unless it be to forgive them."

"Madam," said Anna Comnena, "forgive me if I remind you that you
recommend to a princess, born in the purple itself, a line of conduct
which would hardly become the female who carries the pitcher for the
needful supply of water to the village well. All who are around me have
been taught to pay me the obeisance due to my birth, and while this
Nicephorus Briennius crept on his knees to your daughter's hand, which
you extended towards him, he was rather receiving the yoke of a
mistress than accepting a household alliance with a wife. He has
incurred his doom, without a touch even of that temptation which may be
pled by lesser culprits in his condition; and if it is the will of my
father that he should die, or suffer banishment, or imprisonment, for
the crime he has committed, it is not the business of Anna Comnena to
interfere, she being the most injured among the imperial family, who
have in so many, and such gross respects, the right to complain of his
falsehood."

"Daughter," replied the Empress, "so far I agree with you, that the
treason of Nicephorus towards your father and myself has been in a
great degree unpardonable; nor do I easily see on what footing, save
that of generosity, his life could be saved. But still you are yourself
in different circumstances from me, and may, as an affectionate and
fond wife, compare the intimacies of your former habits with the bloody
change which is so soon to be the consequence and the conclusion of his
crimes. He is possessed of that person and of those features which
women most readily recall to their memory, whether alive or dead. Think
what it will cost you to recollect that the rugged executioner received
his last salute,--that the shapely neck had no better repose than the
rough block--that the tongue, the sound of which you used to prefer to
the choicest instruments of music, is silent in the dust!"

Anna, who was not insensible to the personal graces of her husband, was
much affected by this forcible appeal. "Why distress me thus, mother?"
she replied in a weeping accent. "Did I not feel as acutely as you
would have me to do, this moment, however awful, would be easily borne.
I had but to think of him as he is, to contrast his personal qualities
with those of the mind, by which they are more than overbalanced, and
resign myself to his deserved fate with unresisting submission to my
father's will."

"And that," said the Empress, "would be to bind thee, by his sole fiat,
to some obscure wretch, whose habits of plotting and intriguing had, by
some miserable chance, given him the opportunity of becoming of
importance to the Emperor, and who is, therefore, to be rewarded by the
hand of Anna Comnena."

"Do not think so meanly of me, madam," said the Princess--"I know, as
well as ever Grecian maiden did, how I should free myself from
dishonour; and, you may trust me, you shall never blush for your
daughter."

"Tell me not that," said the Empress, "since I shall blush alike for
the relentless cruelty which gives up a once beloved husband to an
ignominious death, and for the passion, for which I want a name, which
would replace him by an obscure barbarian from the extremity of Thule,
or some wretch escaped from the Blacquernal dungeons."

The Princess was astonished to perceive that her mother was acquainted
with the purposes, even the most private, which her father had formed
for his governance during this emergency. She was ignorant that Alexius
and his royal consort, in other respects living together with a decency
ever exemplary in people of their rank, had, sometimes, on interesting
occasions, family debates, in which the husband, provoked by the
seeming unbelief of his partner, was tempted to let her guess more of
his real purposes than he would have coolly imparted of his own calm
choice.

The Princess was affected at the anticipation of the death of her
husband, nor could this have been reasonably supposed to be otherwise;
but she was still more hurt and affronted by her mother taking it for
granted that she designed upon the instant to replace the Caesar by an
uncertain, and at all events an unworthy successor. Whatever
considerations had operated to make Hereward her choice, their effect
was lost when the match was placed in this odious and degrading point
of view; besides which is to be remembered, that women almost
instinctively deny their first thoughts in favour of a suitor, and
seldom willingly reveal them, unless time and circumstance concur to
favour them. She called Heaven therefore passionately to witness, while
she repelled the charge.

"Bear witness," she said, "Our Lady, Queen of Heaven! Bear witness,
saints and martyrs all, ye blessed ones, who are, more than ourselves,
the guardians of our mental purity! that I know no passion which I dare
not avow, and that if Nicephorus's life depended on my entreaty to God
and men, all his injurious acts towards me disregarded and despised, it
should be as long as Heaven gave to those servants whom it snatched
from the earth without suffering the pangs of mortality!"

"You have sworn boldly," said the Empress. "See, Anna Comnena, that you
keep your word, for believe me it will be tried."

"What will be tried, mother?" said the Princess; "or what have I to do
to pronounce the doom of the Caesar, who is not subject to my power?"

"I will show you," said the Empress, gravely; and, leading her towards
a sort of wardrobe, which formed a closet in the wall, she withdrew a
curtain which hung before it, and placed before her her unfortunate
husband, Nicephorus Briennius, half-attired, with his sword drawn in
his hand. Looking upon him as an enemy, and conscious of some schemes
with respect to him which had passed through her mind in the course of
these troubles, the Princess screamed faintly, upon perceiving him so
near her with a weapon in his hand.

"Be more composed," said the Empress, "or this wretched man, if
discovered, falls no less a victim to thy idle fears than to thy
baneful revenge."

Nicephorus at this speech seemed to have adopted his cue, for, dropping
the point of his sword, and falling on his knees before the Princess,
he clasped his hands to entreat for mercy.

"What hast thou to ask from me?" said his wife, naturally assured, by
her husband's prostration, that the stronger force was upon her own
side--"what hast thou to ask from me, that outraged gratitude, betrayed
affection, the most solemn vows violated, and the fondest ties of
nature torn asunder like the spider's broken web, will permit thee to
put in words for very shame?"

"Do not suppose, Anna," replied the suppliant, "that I am at this
eventful period of my life to play the hypocrite, for the purpose of
saving the wretched remnant of a dishonoured existence. I am but
desirous to part in charity with thee, to make my peace with Heaven,
and to nourish the last hope of making my way, though burdened with
many crimes, to those regions in which alone I can find thy beauty, thy
talents, equalled at least, if not excelled."

"You hear him, daughter?" said Irene; "his boon is for forgiveness
alone; thy condition is the more godlike, since thou mayst unite the
safety of his life with the pardon of his offences."

"Thou art deceived, mother," answered Anna. "It is not mine to pardon
his guilt, far less to remit his punishment. You have taught me to
think of myself as future ages shall know me; what will they say of me,
those future ages, when I am described as the unfeeling daughter, who
pardoned the intended assassin of her father, because she saw in him
her own unfaithful husband?"

"See there," said the Caesar, "is not that, most serene Empress, the
very point of despair? and have I not in vain offered my life-blood to
wipe out the stain of parricide and ingratitude? Have I not also
vindicated myself from the most unpardonable part of the accusation,
which charged me with attempting the murder of the godlike Emperor?
Have I not sworn by all that is sacred to man, that my purpose went no
farther than to sequestrate Alexius for a little time from the fatigues
of empire, and place him where he should quietly enjoy ease and
tranquillity? while, at the same time, his empire should be as
implicitly regulated by himself, his sacred pleasure being transmitted
through me, as in any respect, or at any period, it had ever been?"

"Erring man!" said the Princess, "hast thou approached so near to the
footstool of Alexius Comnenus, and durst thou form so false an estimate
of him, as to conceive it possible that he would consent to be a mere
puppet by whose intervention you might have brought his empire into
submission? Know that the blood of Comnenus is not so poor; my father
would have resisted the treason in arms; and by the death of thy
benefactor only couldst thou have gratified the suggestions of thy
criminal ambition."

"Be such your belief," said the Caesar; "I have said enough for a life
which is not and ought not to be dear to me. Call your guards, and let
them take the life of the unfortunate Briennius, since it has become
hateful to his once beloved Anna Comnena. Be not afraid that any
resistance of mine shall render the scene of my apprehension dubious or
fatal. Nicephorus Briennius is Caesar no longer, and he thus throws at
the feet of his Princess and spouse, the only poor means which he has
of resisting the just doom which is therefore at her pleasure to pass."

He cast his sword before the feet of the Princess, while Irene
exclaimed, weeping, or seeming to weep bitterly, "I have indeed read of
such scenes! but could I ever have thought that my own daughter would
have been the principal actress in one of them--could I ever have
thought that her mind, admired by every one as a palace for the
occupation of Apollo and the Muses, should not have had room enough for
the humbler, but more amiable virtue of feminine charity and
compassion, which builds itself a nest in the bosom of the lowest
village girl? Do thy gifts, accomplishments, and talents, spread
hardness as well as polish over thy heart? If so, a hundred times
better renounce them all, and retain in their stead those gentle and
domestic virtues which are the first honours of the female heart. A
woman who is pitiless, is a worse monster than one who is unsexed by
any other passion."

"What would you have me do?" said Anna. "You, mother, ought to know
better than I, that the life of my father is hardly consistent with the
existence of this bold and cruel man. O, I am sure he still meditates
his purpose of conspiracy! He that could deceive a woman in the manner
he has done me, will not relinquish a plan which is founded upon the
death of his benefactor."

"You do me injustice, Anna," said Briennius, starting up, and
imprinting a kiss upon her lips ere she was aware. "By this caress, the
last that will pass between us, I swear, that if in my life I have
yielded to folly, I have, notwithstanding, never been guilty of a
treason of the heart towards a woman as superior to the rest of the
female world in talents and accomplishments, as in personal beauty."

The Princess, much softened, shook her head, as she replied--"Ah,
Nicephorus!--such were once your words! such, perhaps, were then your
thoughts! But who, or what, shall now warrant to me the veracity of
either?"

"Those very accomplishments, and that very beauty itself," replied
Nicephorus.

"And if more is wanting," said Irene, "thy mother will enter her
security for him. Deem her not an insufficient pledge in this affair;
she is thy mother, and the wife of Alexius Comnenus, interested beyond
all human beings in the growth and increase of the power and dignity of
her husband and her child; and one who sees on this occasion an
opportunity for exercising generosity, for soldering up the breaches of
the Imperial house, and reconstructing the frame of government upon a
basis, which, if there be faith and gratitude in man, shall never be
again exposed to hazard."

"To the reality of that faith and gratitude, then," said the Princess,
"we must trust implicitly, as it is your will, mother; although even my
own knowledge of the subject, both through study and experience of the
world, has called me to observe the rashness of such confidence. But
although we two may forgive Nicephorus's errors, the Emperor is still
the person to whom the final reference must be had, both as to pardon
and favour."

"Fear not Alexius," answered her mother; "he will speak determinedly
and decidedly; but, if he acts not in the very moment of forming the
resolution, it is no more to be relied on than an icicle in time of
thaw. Do thou apprize me, if thou canst, what the Emperor is at present
doing, and take my word I will find means to bring him round to our
opinion."

"Must I then betray secrets which my father has intrusted to me?" said
the Princess; "and to one who has so lately held the character of his
avowed enemy?"

"Call it not betray," said Irene, "since it is written thou shalt
betray no one, least of all thy father, and the father of the empire.
Yet again it is written, by the holy Luke, that men shall be betrayed,
both by parents and brethren, and kinsfolk and friends, and therefore
surely also by daughters; by which I only mean thou shalt discover to
us thy father's secrets, so far as may enable us to save the life of
thy husband. The necessity of the case excuses whatever may be
otherwise considered as irregular."

"Be it so then, mother. Having yielded my consent perhaps too easily,
to snatch this malefactor from my father's justice, I am sensible I
must secure his safety by such means as are in my power. I left my
father at the bottom of those stairs, called the Pit of Acheron, in the
cell of a blind man, to whom he gave the name of Ursel."

"Holy Mary!" exclaimed the Empress, "thou hast named a name which has
been long unspoken in the open air."

"Has the Emperor's sense of his danger from the living," said the
Caesar, "induced him to invoke the dead?--for Ursel has been no living
man for the space of three years."

"It matters not," said Anna Comnena; "I tell you true. My father even
now held conference with a miserable-looking prisoner, whom he so
named."

"It is a danger the more," said the Caesar; "he cannot have forgotten
the zeal with which I embraced the cause of the present Emperor against
his own; and so soon as he is at liberty, he will study to avenge it.
For this we must endeavour to make some provision, though it increases
our difficulties.--Sit down then, my gentle, my beneficent mother; and
thou, my wife, who hast preferred thy love for an unworthy husband to
the suggestions of jealous passion and of headlong revenge, sit down,
and let us see in what manner it may be in our power, consistently with
your duty to the Emperor, to bring our broken vessel securely into
port."

He employed much natural grace of manner in handing the mother and
daughter to their seats; and, taking his place confidentially between
them, all were soon engaged in concerting what measures should be taken
for the morrow, not forgetting such as should at once have the effect
of preserving the Caesar's life, and at the same time of securing the
Grecian empire against the conspiracy of which he had been the chief
instigator. Briennius ventured to hint, that perhaps the best way would
be to suffer the conspiracy to proceed as originally intended, pledging
his own faith that the rights of Alexius should be held inviolate
during the struggle; but his influence over the Empress and her
daughter did not extend to obtaining so great a trust. They plainly
protested against permitting him to leave the palace, or taking the
least share in the confusion which to-morrow was certain to witness.

"You forget, noble ladies," said the Caesar, "that my honour is
concerned in meeting the Count of Paris."

"Pshaw! tell me not of your honour, Briennius," said Anna Comnena; "do
I not well know, that although the honour of the western knights be a
species of Moloch, a flesh-devouring, blood-quaffing demon, yet that
which is the god of idolatry to the eastern warriors, though equally
loud and noisy in the hall, is far less implacable in the field?
Believe not that I have forgiven great injuries and insults, in order
to take such false coin as _honour_ in payment; your ingenuity is but
poor, if you cannot devise some excuse which will satisfy the Greeks;
and in good sooth, Briennius, to this battle you go not, whether for
your good or for your ill. Believe not that I will consent to your
meeting either Count or Countess, whether in warlike combat or amorous
parley. So you may at a word count upon remaining prisoner here until
the hour appointed for such gross folly be past and over."

The Caesar, perhaps, was not in his heart angry that his wife's
pleasure was so bluntly and resolutely expressed against the intended
combat. "If," said he, "you are determined to take my honour into your
own keeping, I am here for the present your prisoner, nor have I the
means of interfering with your pleasure. When once at liberty, the free
exercise of my valour and my lance is once more my own."

"Be it so, Sir Paladin," said the Princess, very composedly. "I have
good hope that neither of them will involve you with any of yon
dare-devils of Paris, whether male or female, and that we will regulate
the pitch to which your courage soars, by the estimation of Greek
philosophy, and the judgment of our blessed Lady of Mercy, not her of
the Broken Lances."

At this moment an authoritative knock at the door alarmed the
consultation of the Caesar and the ladies.




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SEVENTH.

     Physician. Be comforted, good madam; the great rage,
     You see is cured in him: and yet it is danger
     To make him even o'er the time he has lost.
     Desire him to go in: trouble him no more,
     Till further settling.
                           KING LEAR.


We left the Emperor Alexius Comnenus at the bottom of a subterranean
vault, with a lamp expiring, and having charge of a prisoner, who
seemed himself nearly reduced to the same extremity. For the first two
or three moments, he listened after his daughter's retiring footsteps.
He grew impatient, and began to long for her return before it was
possible she could have traversed the path betwixt him and the summit
of these gloomy stairs. A minute or two he endured with patience the
absence of the assistance which he had sent her to summon; but strange
suspicions began to cross his imagination. Could it be possible? Had
she changed her purpose on account of the hard words which he had used
towards her? Had she resolved to leave her father to his fate in his
hour of utmost need? and was he to rely no longer upon the assistance
which he had implored her to send?

The short time which the Princess trifled away in a sort of gallantry
with the Varangian Hereward, was magnified tenfold by the impatience of
the Emperor, who began to think that she was gone to fetch the
accomplices of the Caesar to assault their prince in his defenceless
condition, and carry into effect their half-disconcerted conspiracy.

After a considerable time, filled up with this feeling of agonizing
uncertainty, he began at length, more composedly, to recollect the
little chance there was that the Princess would, even for her own sake,
resentful as she was in the highest degree of her husband's ill
behaviour, join her resources to his, to the destruction of one who had
so generally showed himself an indulgent and affectionate father. When
he had adopted this better mood, a step was heard upon the staircase,
and after a long and unequal descent, Hereward, in his heavy armour, at
length coolly arrived at the bottom of the steps. Behind him, panting
and trembling, partly with cold and partly with terror, came Douban,
the slave well skilled in medicine.

"Welcome, good Edward! Welcome, Douban!" he said, "whose medical skill
is sufficiently able to counterbalance the weight of years which hang
upon him."

"Your Highness is gracious," said Douban--but what he would have
farther said was cut off by a violent fit of coughing, the consequence
of his age, of his feeble habit, of the damps of the dungeon, and the
rugged exercise of descending the long and difficult staircase.

"Thou art unaccustomed to visit thy patients in so rough an abode,"
said Alexius; "and, nevertheless, to the damps of these dreary regions
state necessity obliges us to confine many, who are no less our beloved
subjects in reality than they are in title."

The medical man continued his cough, perhaps as an apology for not
giving that answer of assent, with which his conscience did not easily
permit him to reply to an observation, which, though stated by one who
should know the fact, seemed not to be in itself altogether likely.

"Yes, my Douban," said the Emperor, "in this strong case of steel and
adamant have we found it necessary to enclose the redoubted Ursel,
whose fame is spread through the whole world, both for military skill,
political wisdom, personal bravery, and other noble gifts, which we
have been obliged to obscure for a time, in order that we might, at the
fittest conjuncture, which is now arrived, restore them to the world in
their full lustre. Feel his pulse, therefore, Douban--consider him as
one who hath suffered severe confinement, with all its privations, and
is about to be suddenly restored to the full enjoyment of life, and
whatever renders life valuable."

"I will do my best," said Douban; "but your Majesty must consider, that
we work upon a frail and exhausted subject, whose health seems already
wellnigh gone, and may perhaps vanish in an instant--like this pale and
trembling light, whose precarious condition the life-breath of this
unfortunate patient seems closely to resemble."

"Desire, therefore, good Douban, one or two of the mutes who serve in
the interior, and who have repeatedly been thy assistants in such
cases--or stay--Edward, thy motions will be more speedy; do thou go for
the mutes--make them bring some kind of litter to transport the
patient; and, Douban, do thou superintend the whole. Transport him
instantly to a suitable apartment, only taking care that it be secret,
and let him enjoy the comforts of the bath, and whatever else may tend
to restore his feeble animation--keeping in mind, that he must, if
possible, appear to-morrow in the field."

"That will be hard," said Douban, "after having been, it would appear.
subjected to such fare and such usage as his fluctuating pulse
intimates but too plainly."

"'Twas a mistake of the dungeon-keeper, the inhuman villain, who should
not go without his reward," continued the Emperor, "had not Heaven
already bestowed it by the strange means of a sylvan man, or native of
the woods, who yesterday put to death the jailor who meditated the
death of his prisoner--Yes, my dear Douban, a private sentinel of our
guards called the Immortal, had wellnigh annihilated this flower of our
trust, whom for a time we were compelled to immure in secret. Then,
indeed, a rude hammer had dashed to pieces an unparalleled brilliant,
but the fates have arrested such a misfortune."

The assistance having arrived, the physician, who seemed more
accustomed to act than to speak, directed a bath to be prepared with
medicated herbs, and gave it as his opinion, that the patient should
not be disturbed till to-morrow's sun was high in the heavens. Ursel
accordingly was assisted to the bath, which was employed according to
the directions of the physician; but without affording any material
symptoms of recovery. From thence he was transferred to a cheerful
bedchamber, opening by an ample window to one of the terraces of the
palace, which commanded an extensive prospect. These operations were
performed upon a frame so extremely stupified by previous suffering, so
dead to the usual sensations of existence, that it was not till the
sensibility should be gradually restored by friction of the stiffened
limbs, and other means, that the leech hoped the mists of the intellect
should at length begin to clear away.

Douban readily undertook to obey the commands of the Emperor, and
remained by the bed of the patient until the dawn of morning, ready to
support nature as far as the skill of leechcraft admitted.

From the mutes, much more accustomed to be the executioners of the
Emperor's displeasure than of his humanity, Douban selected one man of
milder mood, and by Alexius's order, made him understand, that the ask
in which he was engaged was to be kept most strictly secret, while the
hardened slave was astonished to find that the attentions paid to the
sick were to be rendered with yet more mystery than the bloody offices
of death and torture.

The passive patient received the various acts of attention which were
rendered to him in silence; and if not totally without consciousness,
at least without a distinct comprehension of their object. After the
soothing operation of the bath, and the voluptuous exchange of the rude
and musty pile of straw, on which he had stretched himself for years,
for a couch of the softest down, Ursel was presented with a sedative
draught, slightly tinctured with an opiate. The balmy restorer of
nature came thus invoked, and the captive sunk into a delicious slumber
long unknown to him, and which seemed to occupy equally his mental
faculties and his bodily frame, while the features were released from
their rigid tenor, and the posture of the limbs, no longer disturbed by
fits of cramp, and sudden and agonizing twists and throes, seemed
changed for a placid state of the most perfect ease and tranquillity.

The morn was already colouring the horizon, and the freshness of the
breeze of dawn had insinuated itself into the lofty halls of the palace
of the Blacquernal, when a gentle tap at the door of the chamber
awakened Douban, who, undisturbed from the calm state of his patient,
had indulged himself in a brief repose. The door opened, and a figure
appeared, disguised in the robes worn by an officer of the palace, and
concealed, beneath an artificial beard of great size, and of a white
colour, the features of the Emperor himself. "Douban," said Alexius,
"how fares it with thy patient, whose safety is this day of such
consequence to the Grecian state?"

"Well, my lord," replied the physician, "excellently well; and if he is
not now disturbed, I will wager whatever skill I possess, that nature,
assisted by the art of the physician, will triumph over the damps and
the unwholesome air of the impure dungeon. Only be prudent, my lord,
and let not an untimely haste bring this Ursel forward into the contest
ere he has arranged the disturbed current of his ideas, and recovered,
in some degree, the spring of his mind, and the powers of his body."

"I will rule my impatience," said the Emperor, "or rather, Douban, I
will be ruled by thee. Thinkest thou he is awake?"

"I am inclined to think so," said the leech, "but he opens not his
eyes, and seems to me as if he absolutely resisted the natural impulse
to rouse himself and look around him."

"Speak to him," said the Emperor, "and let us know what is passing in
his mind."

"It is at some risk," replied the physician, "but you shall be obeyed.
--Ursel," he said, approaching the bed of his blind patient, and then,
in a louder tone, he repeated again, "Ursel! Ursel!"

"Peace--Hush!" muttered the patient; "disturb not the blest in their
ecstacy--nor again recall the most miserable of mortals to finish the
draught of bitterness which his fate had compelled him to commence."

"Again, again," said the Emperor, aside to Douban, "try him yet again;
it is of importance for me to know in what degree he possesses his
senses, or in what measure they have disappeared from him."

"I would not, however," said the physician, "be the rash and guilty
person, who, by an ill-timed urgency, should produce a total alienation
of mind and plunge him back either into absolute lunacy, or produce a
stupor in which he might remain for a long period."

"Surely not," replied the Emperor: "my commands are those of one
Christian to another, nor do I wish them farther obeyed than as they
are consistent with the laws of God and man."

He paused for a moment after this declaration, and yet but few minutes
had elapsed ere he again urged the leech to pursue the interrogation of
his patient. "If you hold me not competent," said Douban, somewhat vain
of the trust necessarily reposed in him, "to judge of the treatment of
my patient, your Imperial Highness must take the risk and the trouble
upon yourself."

"Marry, I shall," said the Emperor, "for the scruples of leeches are
not to be indulged, when the fate of kingdoms and the lives of monarchs
are placed against them in the scales.--Rouse thee, my noble Ursel!
hear a voice, with which thy ears were once well acquainted, welcome
thee back to glory and command! Look around thee, and see how the world
smiles to welcome thee back from imprisonment to empire!"

"Cunning fiend!" said Ursel, "who usest the most wily baits in order to
augment the misery of the wretched! Know, tempter, that I am conscious
of the whole trick of the soothing images of last night--thy baths--thy
beds--and thy bowers of bliss.--But sooner shalt thou be able to bring
a smile upon the cheek of St. Anthony the Eremite, than induce me to
curl mine after the fashion of earthly voluptuaries."

"Try it, foolish man," insisted the Emperor, "and trust to the evidence
of thy senses for the reality of the pleasures by which thou art now
surrounded; or, if thou art obstinate in thy lack of faith, tarry as
thou art for a single moment, and I will bring with me a being so
unparalleled in her loveliness, that a single glance of her were worth
the restoration of thine eyes, were it only to look upon her for a
moment." So saying he left the apartment.

"Traitor," said Ursel, "and deceiver of old, bring no one hither! and
strive not, by shadowy and ideal forms of beauty, to increase the
delusion that gilds my prison-house for a moment, in order, doubtless,
to destroy totally the spark of reason, and then exchange this earthly
hell for a dungeon in the infernal regions themselves."

"His mind is somewhat shattered," mused the physician, "which is often
the consequence of a long solitary confinement. I marvel much," was his
farther thought, "if the Emperor can shape out any rational service
which this man can render him, after being so long immured in so
horrible a dungeon.--Thou thinkest, then," continued he, addressing the
patient, "that the seeming release of last night, with its baths and
refreshments, was only a delusive dream, without any reality?"

"Ay--what else?" answered Ursel.

"And that the arousing thyself, as we desire thee to do, would be but a
resigning to a vain temptation, in order to wake to more unhappiness
than formerly?"

"Even so," returned the patient.

"What, then, are thy thoughts of the Emperor by whose command thou
sufferest so severe a restraint?"

Perhaps Douban wished he had forborne this question, for, in the very
moment when he put it, the door of the chamber opened, and the Emperor
entered, with his daughter hanging upon his arm, dressed with
simplicity, yet with becoming splendour. She had found time, it seems,
to change her dress for a white robe, which resembled a kind of
mourning, the chief ornament of which was a diamond chaplet, of
inestimable value, which surrounded and bound the long sable tresses,
that reached from her head to her waist. Terrified almost to death, she
had been surprised by her father in the company of her husband the
Caesar, and her mother; and the same thundering mandate had at once
ordered Briennius, in the character of a more than suspected traitor,
under the custody of a strong guard of Varangians, and commanded her to
attend her father to the bedchamber of Ursel, in which she now stood;
resolved, however, that she would stick by the sinking fortunes of her
husband, even in the last extremity, yet no less determined that she
would not rely upon her own entreaties or remonstrances, until she
should see whether her father's interference was likely to reassume a
resolved and positive character. Hastily as the plans of Alexius had
been formed, and hastily as they had been disconcerted by accident,
there remained no slight chance that he might be forced to come round
to the purpose on which his wife and daughter had fixed their heart,
the forgiveness, namely, of the guilty Nicephorus Briennius. To his
astonishment, and not perhaps greatly to his satisfaction, he heard the
patient deeply engaged with the physician in canvassing his own
character.

"Think not," said Ursel in reply to him, "that though I am immured in
this dungeon, and treated as something worse than an outcast of
humanity--and although I am, moreover, deprived of my eyesight, the
dearest gift of Heaven--think not, I say, though I suffer all this by
the cruel will of Alexius Comnenus, that therefore I hold him to be
mine enemy; on the contrary, it is by his means that the blinded and
miserable prisoner has been taught to seek a liberty far more
unconstrained than this poor earth can afford, and a vision far more
clear than any Mount Pisgah on this wretched side of the grave can give
us: Shall I therefore account the Emperor among mine enemies? He who
has taught me the vanity of earthly things--the nothingness of earthly
enjoyments--and the pure hope of a better world, as a certain exchange
for the misery of the present? No!"

The Emperor had stood somewhat disconcerted at the beginning of this
speech, but hearing it so very unexpectedly terminate, as he was
willing to suppose, much in his own favour, he threw himself into an
attitude which was partly that of a modest person listening to his own
praises, and partly that of a man highly struck with the commendations
heaped upon him by a generous adversary.

"My friend," he said aloud, "how truly do you read my purpose, when you
suppose that the knowledge which men of your disposition can extract
from evil, was all the experience which I wished you to derive from a
captivity protracted by adverse circumstances, far, very far, beyond my
wishes! Let me embrace the generous man who knows so well how to
construe the purpose of a perplexed, but still faithful friend."

The patient raised himself in his bed.

"Hold there!" he said, "methinks my faculties begin to collect
themselves. Yes," he muttered, "that is the treacherous voice which
first bid me welcome as a friend, and then commanded fiercely that I
should be deprived of the sight of my eyes!--Increase thy rigour if
thou wilt, Comnenus--add, if thou canst, to the torture of my
confinement--but since I cannot see thy hypocritical and inhuman
features, spare me, in mercy, the sound of a voice, more distressing to
mine ear than toads, than serpents,--than whatever nature has most
offensive and disgusting!"

This speech was delivered with so much energy, that it was in vain that
the Emperor strove to interrupt its tenor; although he himself, as well
as Douban and his daughter, heard a great deal more of the language of
unadorned and natural passion than he had counted upon.

"Raise thy head, rash man," he said, "and charm thy tongue, ere it
proceed in a strain which may cost thee dear. Look at me, and see if I
have not reserved a reward capable of atoning for all the evil which
thy folly may charge to my account."

Hitherto the prisoner had remained with his eyes obstinately shut,
regarding the imperfect recollection he had of sights which had been
before his eyes the foregoing evening, as the mere suggestion of a
deluded imagination, if not actually presented by some seducing spirit.
But now when his eyes fairly encountered the stately figure of the
Emperor, and the graceful form of his lovely daughter, painted in the
tender rays of the morning dawn, he ejaculated faintly, "I see!--I
see!"--And with that ejaculation fell back on the pillow in a swoon,
which instantly found employment for Douban and his restoratives.

"A most wonderful cure indeed!" exclaimed the physician; "and the
height of my wishes would be to possess such another miraculous
restorative."

"Fool!" said the Emperor; "canst thou not conceive that what has never
been taken away is restored with little difficulty? He was made," he
said, lowering his voice, "to undergo a painful operation, which led
him to believe that the organs of sight were destroyed; and as light
scarcely ever visited him, and when it did, only in doubtful and
invisible glimmerings, the prevailing darkness, both physical and
mental, that surrounded him, prevented him from being sensible of the
existence of that precious faculty, of which he imagined himself
bereft. Perhaps thou wilt ask my reason for inflicting upon him so
strange a deception?--Simply it was, that being by it conceived
incapable of reigning, his memory might pass out of the minds of the
public, while, at the same time, I reserved his eyesight, that in case
occasion should call, it might be in my power once more to liberate him
from his dungeon, and employ, as I now propose to do, his courage and
talents in the service of the empire, to counterbalance those of other
conspirators."

"And can your imperial Highness," said Douban, "hope that you have
acquired this man's duty and affection by the conduct you have observed
to him?"

"I cannot tell," answered the Emperor; "that must be as futurity shall
determine. All I know is, that it is no fault of mine, if Ursel does
not reckon freedom and a long course of Empire--perhaps sanctioned by
an alliance with our own blood--and the continued enjoyment of the
precious organs of eyesight, of which a less scrupulous man would have
deprived him, against a maimed and darkened existence."

"Since such is your Highness's opinion and resolution," said Douban,
"it is for me to aid, and not to counteract it. Permit me, therefore,
to pray your Highness and the Princess to withdraw, that I may use such
remedies as may confirm a mind which has been so strangely shaken, and
restore to him fully the use of those eyes, of which he has been so
long deprived."

"I am content, Douban," said the Emperor; "but take notice, Ursel is
not totally at liberty until he has expressed the resolution to become
actually mine. It may behove both him and thee to know, that although
there is no purpose of remitting him to the dungeons of the Blacquernal
palace, yet if he, or any on his part, should aspire to head a party in
these feverish times,--by the honour of a gentleman, to swear a
Frankish oath, he shall find that he is not out of the reach of the
battle-axes of my Varangians. I trust to thee to communicate this fact,
which concerns alike him and all who have interest in his
fortunes.--Come, daughter, we will withdraw, and leave the leech with
his patient --Take notice, Douban, it is of importance that you
acquaint me the very first moment when the patient can hold rational
communication with me."

Alexius and his accomplished daughter departed accordingly.




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-EIGHTH.

     Sweet are the uses of adversity,
     Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
     Bears yet a precious jewel in its head.
                             AS YOU LIKE IT.


From a terraced roof of the Blacquernal palace, accessible by a
sash-door, which opened from the bed-chamber of Ursel, there was
commanded one of the most lovely and striking views which the romantic
neighbourhood of Constantinople afforded.

After suffering him to repose and rest his agitated faculties, it was
to this place that the physician led his patient; for when somewhat
composed, he had of himself requested to be permitted to verify the
truth of his restored eyesight, by looking out once more upon the
majestic face of nature.

On the one hand, the scene which he beheld was a masterpiece of human
art. The proud city, ornamented with stately buildings, as became the
capital of the world, showed a succession of glittering spires and
orders of architecture, some of them chaste and simple, like those the
capitals of which were borrowed from baskets-full of acanthus; some
deriving the fluting of their shafts from the props made originally to
support the lances of the earlier Greeks--forms simple, yet more
graceful in their simplicity, than any which human ingenuity has been
able since to invent. With the most splendid specimens which ancient
art could afford of those strictly classical models were associated
those of a later age, where more modern taste had endeavoured at
improvement, and, by mixing the various orders, had produced such as
were either composite, or totally out of rule. The size of the
buildings in which they were displayed, however, procured them respect;
nor could even the most perfect judge of architecture avoid being
struck by the grandeur of their extent and effect, although hurt by the
incorrectness of the taste in which they were executed. Arches of
triumph, towers, obelisks, and spires, designed for various purposes,
rose up into the air in confused magnificence; while the lower view was
filled by the streets of the city, the domestic habitations forming
long narrow alleys, on either side of which the houses arose to various
and unequal heights, but, being generally finished with terraced
coverings, thick set with plants and flowers, and fountains, had, when
seen from an eminence, a more noble and interesting aspect than is ever
afforded by the sloping and uniform roofs of streets in the capitals of
the north of Europe.

It has taken us some time to give, in words, the idea which was at a
single glance conveyed to Ursel, and affected him at first with great
pain. His eyeballs had been long strangers to that daily exercise,
which teaches us the habit of correcting the scenes as they appear to
our sight, by the knowledge which we derive from the use of our other
senses. His idea of distance was so confused, that it seemed as if all
the spires, turrets, and minarets which he beheld, were crowded forward
upon his eyeballs, and almost touching them. With a shriek of horror,
Ursel turned himself to the further side, and cast his eyes upon a
different scene. Here also he saw towers, steeples, and turrets, but
they were those of the churches and public buildings beneath his feet,
reflected from the dazzling piece of water which formed the harbour of
Constantinople, and which, from the abundance of wealth which it
transported to the city, was well termed the Golden Horn. In one place,
this superb basin was lined with quays, where stately dromonds and
argosies unloaded their wealth, while, by the shore of the haven,
galleys, feluccas, and other small craft, idly flapped the singularly
shaped and snow-white pinions which served them for sails. In other
places the Golden Horn lay shrouded in a verdant mantle of trees, where
the private gardens of wealthy or distinguished individuals, or places
of public recreation, shot down upon and were bounded by the glassy
waters.

On the Bosphorus, which might be seen in the distance, the little fleet
of Tancred was lying in the same station they had gained during the
night, which was fitted to command the opposite landing; this their
general had preferred to a midnight descent upon Constantinople, not
knowing whether, so coming, they might be received as friends or
enemies. This delay, however, had given the Greeks an opportunity,
either by the orders of Alexius, or the equally powerful mandates of
some of the conspirators, to tow six ships of war, full of armed men,
and provided with the maritime offensive weapons peculiar to the Greeks
at that period, which they had moored so as exactly to cover the place
where the troops of Tancred must necessarily land.

This preparation gave some surprise to the valiant Tancred, who did not
know that such vessels had arrived in the harbour from Lemnos on the
preceding night. The undaunted courage of that prince was, however, in
no respect to be shaken by the degree of unexpected danger with which
his adventure now appeared to be attended.

This splendid view, from the description of which we have in some
degree digressed, was seen by the physician and Ursel from a terrace,
the loftiest almost on the palace of the Blacquernal. To the city-ward,
it was bounded by a solid wall, of considerable height, giving a
resting-place for the roof of a lower building, which, sloping outward,
broke to the view the vast height unobscured otherwise save by a high
and massy balustrade, composed of bronze, which, to the havenward, sunk
sheer down upon an uninterrupted precipice.

No sooner, therefore, had Ursel turned his eyes that way, than, though
placed far from the brink of the terrace, he exclaimed, with a shriek,
"Save me--save me! if you are not indeed the destined executors of the
Emperor's will."

"We are indeed such," said Douban, "to save, and if possible to bring
you to complete recovery; but by no means to do you injury, or to
suffer it to be offered by others."

"Guard me then from myself," said Ursel, "and save me from the reeling
and insane desire which I feel to plunge myself into the abyss, to the
edge of which you have guided me."

"Such a giddy and dangerous temptation is," said the physician, "common
to those who have not for a long time looked down from precipitous
heights, and are suddenly brought to them. Nature, however bounteous,
hath not provided for the cessation of our faculties for years, and for
their sudden resumption in full strength and vigour. An interval,
longer or shorter, must needs intervene. Can you not believe this
terrace a safe station while you have my support and that of this
faithful slave?"

"Certainly," said Ursel; "but permit me to turn my face towards this
stone wall, for I cannot bear to look at the flimsy piece of wire,
which is the only battlement of defence that interposes betwixt me and
the precipice." He spoke of the bronze balustrade, six feet high, and
massive in proportion. Thus saying, and holding fast by the physician's
arm, Ursel, though himself a younger and more able man, trembled, and
moved his feet as slowly as if made of lead, until he reached the
sashed-door, where stood a kind of balcony-seat, in which he placed
himself.--"Here," he said, "will I remain."

"And here," said Douban, "will I make the communication of the Emperor,
which it is necessary you should be prepared to reply to. It places
you, you will observe, at your own disposal for liberty or captivity,
but it conditions for your resigning that sweet but sinful morsel
termed revenge, which, I must not conceal from you, chance appears
willing to put into your hand. You know the degree of rivalry in which
you have been held by the Emperor, and you know the measure of evil you
have sustained at his hand. The question is, Can you forgive what has
taken place?"

"Let me wrap my head round with my mantle," said Ursel, "to dispel this
dizziness which still oppresses my poor brain, and as soon as the power
of recollection is granted me, you shall know my sentiments."

He sunk upon the seat, muffled in the way which he described, and after
a few minutes' reflection, with a trepidation which argued the patient
still to be under the nervous feeling of extreme horror mixed with
terror, he addressed Douban thus: "The operation of wrong and cruelty,
in the moment when they are first inflicted, excites, of course, the
utmost resentment of the sufferer; nor is there, perhaps, a passion
which lives so long in his bosom as the natural desire of revenge. If,
then, during the first month, when I lay stretched upon my bed of want
and misery, you had offered me an opportunity of revenge upon my cruel
oppressor, the remnant of miserable life which remained to me should
have been willingly bestowed to purchase it. But a suffering of weeks,
or even months, must not be compared in effect with that of years. For
a short space of endurance, the body, as well as the mind, retains that
vigorous habit which holds the prisoner still connected with life, and
teaches him to thrill at the long-forgotten chain of hopes, of wishes,
of disappointments, and mortifications, which affected his former
existence. But the wounds become callous as they harden, and other and
better feelings occupy their place, while they gradually die away in
forgetfulness. The enjoyments, the amusements of this world, occupy no
part of his time upon whom the gates of despair have once closed. I
tell thee, my kind physician, that for a season, in an insane attempt
to effect my liberty, I cut through a large portion of the living rock.
But Heaven cured me of so foolish an idea; and if I did not actually
come to love Alexius Comnenus--for how could that have been a possible
effect in any rational state of my intellects?--yet as I became
convinced of my own crimes, sins, and follies, the more and more I was
also persuaded that Alexius was but the agent through whom Heaven
exercised a dearly-purchased right of punishing me for my manifold
offences and transgressions; and that it was not therefore upon the
Emperor that my resentment ought to visit itself. And I can now say to
thee, that so far as a man who has undergone so dreadful a change can
be supposed to know his own mind, I feel no desire either to rival
Alexius in a race for empire, or to avail myself of any of the various
proffers which he proposes to me as the price of withdrawing my claim.
Let him keep unpurchased the crown, for which he has paid, in my
opinion, a price which it is not worth."

"This is extraordinary stoicism, noble Ursel," answered the physician
Douban. "Am I then to understand that you reject the fair offers of
Alexius, and desire, instead of all which he is willing--nay, anxious
to bestow--to be committed safely back to thy old blinded dungeon in
the Blacquernal, that you may continue at ease those pietistic
meditations which have already conducted thee to so extravagant a
conclusion?"

"Physician," said Ursel, while a shuddering fit that affected his whole
body testified his alarm at the alternative proposed--"one would
imagine thine own profession might have taught thee, that no mere
mortal man, unless predestined to be a glorified saint, could ever
prefer darkness to the light of day; blindness itself to the enjoyment
of the power of sight; the pangs of starving to competent sustenance,
or the damps of a dungeon to the free air of God's creation. No!--it
may be virtue to do so, but to such a pitch mine does not soar. All I
require of the Emperor for standing by him with all the power my name
can give him at this crisis is, that he will provide for my reception
as a monk in some of those pleasant and well endowed seminaries of
piety, to which his devotion, or his fears, have given rise. Let me not
be again the object of his suspicion, the operation of which is more
dreadful than that of being the object of his hate. Forgotten by power,
as I have myself lost the remembrance of those that wielded it, let me
find my way to the grave, unnoticed, unconstrained, at liberty, in
possession of my dim and disused organs of sight, and, above all, at
peace."

"If such be thy serious and earnest wish, noble Ursel," said the
physician, "I myself have no hesitation to warrant to thee the full
accomplishment of thy religious and moderate desires. But, bethink
thee, thou art once more an inhabitant of the court, in which thou
mayst obtain what thou wilt to-day; while to-morrow, shouldst thou
regret thy indifference, it may be thy utmost entreaty will not suffice
to gain for thee the slightest extension of thy present conditions."

"Be it so," said Ursel; "I will then stipulate for another condition,
which indeed has only reference to this day. I will solicit his
Imperial Majesty, with all humility, to spare me the pain of a personal
treaty between himself and me, and that he will be satisfied with the
solemn assurance that I am most willing to do in his favour all that he
is desirous of dictating; while, on the other hand, I desire only the
execution of those moderate conditions of my future aliment which I
have already told thee at length."

"But wherefore," said Douban, "shouldst thou be afraid of announcing to
the Emperor thy disposition to an agreement, which cannot be esteemed
otherwise than extremely moderate on thy part? Indeed, I fear the
Emperor will insist on a brief personal conference."

"I am not ashamed," said Ursel, "to confess the truth. It is true, that
I have, or think I have, renounced what the Scripture calls the pride
of life; but the old Adam still lives within us, and maintains against
the better part of our nature an inextinguishable quarrel, easy to be
aroused from its slumber, but as difficult to be again couched in
peace. While last night I but half understood that mine enemy was in my
presence, and while my faculties performed but half their duty in
recalling his deceitful and hated accents, did not my heart throb in my
bosom with all the agitation of a taken bird, and shall I again have to
enter into a personal treaty with the man who, be his general conduct
what it may, has been, the constant and unprovoked cause of my
unequalled misery? Douban, no!--to listen to his voice again, were to
hear an alarm sounded to every violent and vindictive passion, of my
heart; and though, may Heaven so help me as my intentions towards him
are upright, yet it is impossible for me to listen to his professions
with a chance of safety either to him or to myself."

"If you be so minded," replied Douban, "I shall only repeat to him your
stipulation, and you must swear to him that you will strictly observe
it. Without this being done, it must be difficult, or perhaps
impossible, to settle the league of which both are desirous."

"Amen!" said Ursel; "and as I am pure in my purpose, and resolved to
keep it to the uttermost, so may Heaven guard me from the influence of
precipitate revenge, ancient grudge, or new quarrel!"

An authoritative knock at the door of the sleeping chamber was now
heard, and Ursel, relieved by more powerful feelings, from the
giddiness of which he had complained, walked firmly into the bedroom,
and seating himself, waited with averted eyes the entrance of the
person who demanded admittance, and who proved to be no other than
Alexius Comnenus.

The Emperor appeared at the door in a warlike dress, suited for the
decoration of a prince who was to witness a combat in the lists fought
out before him.

"Sage Douban," he said, "has our esteemed prisoner, Ursel, made his
choice between our peace and enmity?"

"He hath, my lord," replied the physician, "embraced the lot of that
happy portion of mankind, whose hearts and lives are devoted to the
service of your Majesty's government."

"He will then this day," continued the Emperor, "render me the office
of putting down all those who may pretend to abet insurrection in his
name, and under pretext of his wrongs?"

"He will, my lord," replied the physician, "act to the fullest the part
which you require."

"And in what way," said the Emperor, adopting his most gracious tone of
voice, "would our faithful Ursel desire that services like these,
rendered in the hour of extreme need; should be acknowledged by the
Emperor?"

"Simply," answered Douban, "by saying nothing upon the subject. He
desires only that all jealousies between you and him may be henceforth
forgotten, and that he may be admitted into one of your Highness's
monastic institutions, with leave to dedicate the rest of his life to
the worship of Heaven and its saints."

"Hath he persuaded thee of this, Douban?"--said the Emperor, in a low
and altered voice. "By Heaven! when I consider from what prison he was
brought, and in what guise he inhabited it, I cannot believe in this
gall-less disposition. He must at least speak to me himself, ere I can
believe, in some degree, the transformation of the fiery Ursel into a
being so little capable of feeling the ordinary impulses of mankind."

"Hear me, Alexius Comnenus," said the prisoner; "and so may thine own
prayers to Heaven find access and acceptation, as thou believest the
words which I speak to thee in simplicity of heart. If thine empire of
Greece were made of coined gold, it would hold out no bait for my
acceptance; nor, I thank Heaven, have even the injuries I have
experienced at thy hand, cruel and extensive as they have been,
impressed upon me the slightest desire of requiting treachery with
treachery. Think of me as thou wilt, so thou seek'st not again to
exchange words with me; and believe me, that when thou hast put me
under the most rigid of thy ecclesiastical foundations, the discipline,
the fare, and the vigils, will be far superior to the existence falling
to the share of those whom the King delights to honour, and who
therefore must afford the King their society whenever they are summoned
to do so."

"It is hardly for me," said the physician, "to interpose in so high a
matter; yet, as trusted both by the noble Ursel, and by his Highness
the Emperor, I have made a brief abstract of these short conditions to
be kept by the high parties towards each other, _sub crimine falsi_."

The Emperor protracted the intercourse with Ursel, until he more fully
explained to him the occasion which he should have that very day for
his services. When they parted, Alexius, with a great show of
affection, embraced his late prisoner, while it required all the
self-command and stoicism of Ursel to avoid expressing in plain terms
the extent to which he abhorred the person who thus caressed him.




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-NINTH.

     * * * * O, Conspiracy!
     Sham'st thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,
     When evils are most free? O, then, by day,
     Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
     To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, Conspiracy;
     Hide it in smiles and affability;
     For if thou path thy native semblance on,
     Not Erebus itself were dim enough
     To hide thee from prevention.
                                  JULIUS CAESAR


The important morning at last arrived, on which, by the Imperial
proclamation, the combat between the Caesar and Count Robert of Paris
was appointed to take place. This was a circumstance in a great measure
foreign to the Grecian manners, and to which, therefore, the people
annexed different ideas from those which were associated with the same
solemn decision of God, as the Latins called it, by the Western
nations. The consequence was a vague, but excessive agitation among the
people, who connected the extraordinary strife which they were to
witness, with the various causes which had been whispered abroad as
likely to give occasion to some general insurrection of a great and
terrible nature.

By the Imperial order, regular lists had been prepared for the combat,
with opposite gates, or entrances, as was usual, for the admittance of
the two champions; and it was understood that the appeal was to be made
to the Divinity by each, according to the forms prescribed by the
Church of which the combatants were respectively members. The situation
of these lists was on the side of the shore adjoining on the west to
the continent. At no great distance, the walls of the city were seen,
of various architecture, composed of lime and of stone, and furnished
with no less than four-and-twenty gates, or posterns, five of which
regarded the land, and nineteen the water. All this formed a beautiful
prospect, much of which is still visible. The town itself is about
nineteen miles in circumference; and as it is on all sides surrounded
with lofty cypresses, its general appearance is that of a city arising
out of a stately wood of these magnificent trees, partly shrouding the
pinnacles, obelisks, and minarets, which then marked the site of many
noble Christian temples; but now, generally speaking, intimate the
position of as many Mahomedan mosques.

These lists, for the convenience of spectators, were surrounded on all
sides by long rows of seats, sloping downwards. In the middle of these
seats, and exactly opposite the centre of the lists, was a high throne,
erected for the Emperor himself; and which was separated from the more
vulgar galleries by a circuit of wooden barricades, which an
experienced eye could perceive, might, in case of need, be made
serviceable for purposes of defence.

The lists were sixty yards in length, by perhaps about forty in
breadth, and these afforded ample space for the exercise of the combat,
both on horseback and on foot. Numerous bands of the Greek citizens
began, with the very break of day, to issue from the gates and posterns
of the city, to examine and wonder at the construction of the lists,
pass their criticisms upon the purposes of the peculiar parts of the
fabric, and occupy places, to secure them for the spectacle. Shortly
after arrived a large band of those soldiers who were called the Roman
Immortals. These entered without ceremony, and placed themselves on
either hand of the wooden barricade which fenced the Emperor's seat.
Some of them took even a greater liberty; for, affecting to be pressed
against the boundary, there were individuals who approached the
partition itself, and seemed to meditate climbing over it, and placing
themselves on the same side with the Emperor. Some old domestic slaves
of the household now showed themselves, as if for the purpose of
preserving this sacred circle for Alexius and his court; and, in
proportion as the Immortals began to show themselves encroaching and
turbulent, the strength of the defenders of the prohibited precincts
seemed gradually to increase.

There was, though scarcely to be observed, besides the grand access to
the Imperial seat from without, another opening also from the outside,
secured by a very strong door, by which different persons received
admission beneath the seats destined for the Imperial party. These
persons, by their length of limb, breadth of shoulders, by the fur of
their cloaks, and especially by the redoubted battle-axes which all of
them bore, appeared to be Varangians; but, although neither dressed in
their usual habit of pomp, nor in their more effectual garb of war,
still, when narrowly examined, they might be seen to possess their
usual offensive weapons. These men, entering in separate and straggling
parties, might be observed to join the slaves of the interior of the
palace in opposing the intrusion of the Immortals upon the seat of the
Emperor, and the benches around. Two or three Immortals, who had
actually made good their frolic, and climbed over the division, were
flung back again, very unceremoniously, by the barbaric strength and
sinewy arms of the Varangians.

The people around, and in the adjacent galleries, most of whom had the
air of citizens in their holyday dresses, commented a good deal on
these proceedings, and were inclined strongly to make part with the
Immortals. "It was a shame to the Emperor," they said, "to encourage
these British barbarians to interpose themselves by violence between
his person and the Immortal cohorts of the city, who were in some sort
his own children."

Stephanos, the gymnastic, whose bulky strength and stature rendered him
conspicuous amid this party, said, without hesitation, "If there are
two people here who will join in saying that the Immortals are unjustly
deprived of their right of guarding the Emperor's person, here is the
hand that shall place them beside the Imperial chair."

"Not so," quoth a centurion of the Immortals, whom we have already
introduced to our readers by the name of Harpax; "Not so, Stephanos;
that happy time may arrive, but it is not yet come, my gem of the
circus. Thou knowest that on this occasion it is one of these Counts,
or western Franks, who undertakes the combat; and the Varangians, who
call these people their enemies, have some reason to claim a precedency
in guarding the lists, which it might not at this moment be convenient
to dispute with them. Why, man, if thou wert half so witty as thou art
long, thou wouldst be sensible that it were bad woodmanship to raise
the hollo upon the game, ere it had been driven within compass of the
nets."

While the athlete rolled his huge grey eyes as if to conjure out the
sense of this intimation, his little friend Lysimachus, the artist,
putting himself to pain to stand upon his tiptoe, and look intelligent,
said, approaching as near as he could to Harpax's ear, "Thou mayst
trust me, gallant centurion, that this man. of mould and muscle shall
neither start like a babbling hound on a false scent, nor become mute
and inert, when the general signal is given. But tell me," said he,
speaking very low, and for that purpose mounting a bench, which brought
him on a level with the centurion's ear, "would it not have been better
that a strong guard of the valiant Immortals had been placed in this
wooden citadel, to ensure the object of the day?"

"Without question," said the centurion, "it was so meant; but these
strolling Varangians have altered their station of their own authority."

"Were it not--well," said Lysimachus, "that you, who are greatly more
numerous than the barbarians, should begin a fray before more of these
strangers arrive?"

"Content ye, friend," said the centurion, coldly, "we know our time. An
attack commenced too early would be worse than thrown away, nor would
an opportunity occur of executing our project in the fitting time, if
an alarm were prematurely given at this moment."

So saying, he shuffled off among his fellow-soldiers, so as to avoid
suspicious intercourse with such persons as were only concerned with
the civic portion of the conspirators.

As the morning advanced, and the sun took a higher station in the
horizon, the various persons whom curiosity, or some more decided
motive, brought to see the proposed combat, were seen streaming from
different parts of the town, and rushing to occupy such accommodation
as the circuit round the lists afforded them. In their road to the
place where preparation for combat was made, they had to ascend a sort
of cape, which, in the form of a small hill, projected into the
Hellespont, and the butt of which, connecting it with the shore,
afforded a considerable ascent, and of course a more commanding view of
the strait between Europe and Asia, than either the immediate vicinity
of the city, or the still lower ground upon which the lists were
erected. In passing this height, the earlier visitants of the lists
made little or no halt; but after a time, when it became obvious that
those who had hurried forward to the place of combat were lingering
there without any object or occupation, they that followed them in the
same route, with natural curiosity, paid a tribute to the landscape,
bestowing some attention on its beauty, and paused to see what auguries
could be collected from the water, which were likely to have any
concern in indicating the fate of the events that were to take place.
Some straggling seamen were the first who remarked that a squadron of
the Greek small craft (being that of Tancred) were in the act of making
their way from Asia, and threatening a descent upon Constantinople.

"It is strange," said a person, by rank the captain of a galley, "that
these small vessels, which were ordered to return to Constantinople as
soon as they disembarked the Latins, should have remained so long at
Scutari, and should not be rowing back to the imperial city until this
time, on the second day after their departure from thence."

"I pray to Heaven," said another of the same profession, "that these
seamen may come alone. It seems to me as if their ensign-staffs,
bowsprits, and topmasts were decorated with the same ensigns, or nearly
the same, with those which the Latins displayed upon them, when, by the
Emperor's order, they were transported towards Palestine; so methinks
the voyage back again resembles that of a fleet of merchant vessels,
who have been prevented from discharging their cargo at the place of
their destination."

"There is little good," said one of the politicians whom we formerly
noticed, "in dealing with such commodities, whether they are imported
or exported. Yon ample banner which streams over the foremost galley,
intimates the presence of a chieftain of no small rank among the
Counts, whether it be for valour or for nobility."

The seafaring leader added, with the voice of one who hints alarming
tidings, "They seem to have got to a point in the straits as high as
will enable them to run down--with the tide, and clear the cape which
we stand on, although with what purpose they aim to land so close
beneath the walls of the city, he is a wiser man than I who pretends to
determine."

"Assuredly," returned his comrade, "the intention is not a kind one.
The wealth of the city has temptations to a poor people, who only value
the iron which they possess as affording them the means of procuring
the gold which they covet."

"Ay, brother," answered Demetrius the politician, "but see you not,
lying at anchor within this bay which is formed by the cape, and at the
very point where these heretics are likely to be carried by the tide,
six strong vessels, having the power of sending forth, not merely
showers of darts and arrows, but of Grecian fire, as it is called, from
their hollow decks? If these Frank gentry continue directing their
course upon the Imperial city, being, as they are,

                                    ------'propago
     Contemptrix Superum sane, saevaeque avidissima caedis
     Et violenta;' [Footnote: Ovid, Met.]

we shall speedily see a combat better worth witnessing than that
announced by the great trumpet of the Varangians. If you love me, let
us sit down here for a moment, and see how this matter is to end."

"An excellent motion, my ingenious friend," said Lascaris, which was
the name of the other citizen; "but bethink you, shall we not be in
danger from the missiles with which the audacious Latins will not fail
to return the Greek fire, if, according to your conjecture, it shall be
poured upon them by the Imperial squadron?"

"That is not ill argued, my friend," said Demetrius; "but know that you
have to do with a man who has been in such extremities before now; and
if such a discharge should open from the sea, I would propose to you to
step back some fifty yards inland, and thus to interpose the very crest
of the cape between us and the discharge of missiles; a mere child
might thus learn to face them without any alarm."

"You are a wise man, neighbour," said Lascaris, "and possess such a
mixture of valour and knowledge as becomes a man whom a friend might be
supposed safely to risk his life with. There be those, for instance,
who cannot show you the slightest glimpse of what is going on, without
bringing you within peril of your life; whereas you, my worthy friend
Demetrius, between your accurate knowledge of military affairs, and
your regard for your friend, are sure to show him all that is to be
seen without the least risk to a person, who is naturally unwilling to
think of exposing himself to injury. But, Holy Virgin! what is the
meaning of that red flag which the Greek Admiral has this instant
hoisted?"

"Why, you see, neighbour," answered Demetrius, "yonder western heretic
continues to advance without minding the various signs which our
Admiral has made to him to desist, and now he hoists the bloody
colours, as if a man should clench his fist and say, If you persevere
in your uncivil intention, I will do so and so."

"By St. Sophia," said Lascaris, "and that is giving him fair warning.
But what is it the Imperial Admiral is about to do?"

"Run! run! friend Lascaris," said Demetrius, "or you will see more of
that than perchance you have any curiosity for."

Accordingly, to add the strength of example to precept, Demetrius
himself girt up his loins, and retreated with the most edifying speed
to the opposite side of the ridge, accompanied by the greater part of
the crowd, who had tarried there to witness the contest which the
newsmonger promised, and were determined to take his word for their own
safety. The sound and sight which had alarmed Demetrius, was the
discharge of a large portion of Greek fire, which perhaps may be best
compared to one of those immense Congreve rockets of the present day,
which takes on its shoulders a small grapnel or anchor, and proceeds
groaning through the air, like a fiend overburdened by the mandate of
some inexorable magician, and of which the operation was so terrifying,
that the crews of the vessels attacked by this strange weapon
frequently forsook every means of defence, and ran themselves ashore.
One of the principal ingredients of this dreadful fire was supposed to
be naphtha, or the bitumen which is collected on the banks of the Dead
Sea, and which, when in a state of ignition, could only be extinguished
by a very singular mixture, and which it was not likely to come in
contact with. It produced a thick smoke and loud explosion, and was
capable, says Gibbon, of communicating its flames with equal vehemence
in descent or lateral progress, [Footnote: For a full account of the
Greek five, see Gibbon, chapter 53] In sieges, it was poured from the
ramparts, or launched like our bombs, in red-hot balls of stone or
iron, or it was darted in flax twisted round arrows and in javelins. It
was considered as a state secret of the greatest importance; and for
wellnigh four centuries it was unknown to the Mahomedans. But at length
the composition was discovered by the Saracens, and used by them for
repelling the crusaders, and overpowering the Greeks, upon whose side
it had at one time been the most formidable implement of defence. Some
exaggeration--we must allow for a barbarous period; but there seems no
doubt that the general description of the crusader Joinville should be
admitted as correct:--"It came flying through the air," says that good
knight, "like a winged dragon, about the thickness of a hogshead, with
the report of thunder and the speed of lightning, and the darkness of
the night was dispelled by this horrible illumination."

Not only the bold Demetrius and his pupil Lascaris, but all the crowd
whom they influenced, fled manfully when the commodore of the Greeks
fired the first discharge; and as the other vessels in the squadron
followed his example, the heavens were filled with the unusual and
outrageous noise, while the smoke was so thick as to darken the very
air. As the fugitives passed the crest of the hill, they saw the
seaman, whom we formerly mentioned as a spectator, snugly reclining
under cover of a dry ditch, where he managed so as to secure himself as
far as possible from any accident. He could not, however, omit breaking
his jest on the politicians.

"What, ho!" he cried, "my good friends," without raising himself above
the counterscarp of his ditch, "will you not remain upon your station
long enough to finish that hopeful lecture upon battle by sea and land,
which you had so happy an opportunity of commencing? Believe me, the
noise is more alarming than hurtful; the fire is all pointed in a
direction opposite to yours, and if one of those dragons which you see
does happen to fly landward instead of seaward, it is but the mistake
of some cabin-boy, who has used his linstock with more willingness than
ability."

Demetrius and Lascaris just heard enough of the naval hero's harangue,
to acquaint them with the new danger with which they might be assailed
by the possible misdirection of the weapons, and, rushing clown towards
the lists at the head of a crowd half-desperate with fear, they hastily
propagated the appalling news, that the Latins were coming back from
Asia with the purpose of landing in arms, pillaging, and burning the
city. The uproar, in the meantime, of this unexpected occurrence, was
such as altogether to vindicate, in public opinion, the reported cause,
however exaggerated. The thunder of the Greek fire came successively,
one hard upon the other, and each, in its turn, spread a blot of black
smoke upon the face of the landscape, which, thickened by so many
successive clouds, seemed at last, like that raised by a sustained fire
of modern artillery to overshadow the whole horizon.

The small squadron of Tancred were completely hid from view in the
surging volumes of darkness, which the breath of the weapons of the
enemy had spread around him; and it seemed by a red light, which began
to show itself among the thickest of the veil of darkness, that one of
the flotilla at least had caught fire. Yet the Latins resisted, with an
obstinacy worthy of their own courage, and the fame of their celebrated
leader. Some advantage they had, on account of their small size, and
their lowness in the water, as well as the clouded state of the
atmosphere, which rendered them difficult marks for the fire of the
Greeks.

To increase these advantages, Tancred, as well by boats as by the kind
of rude signals made use of at the period, dispersed orders to his
fleet, that each bark, disregarding the fate of the others, should
press forward individually, and that the men from each should be put on
shore wheresoever and howsoever they could effect that manoeuvre.
Tancred himself set a noble example; he was on board a stout vessel,
fenced in some degree against the effect of the Greek fire by being in
a great measure covered with raw hides, which hides had also been
recently steeped in water. This vessel contained upwards of a hundred
valiant warriors, several of them of knightly order, who had all night
toiled at the humble labours of the oar, and now in the morning applied
their chivalrous hands to the arblast and to the bow, which were in
general accounted the weapons of persons of a lower rank. Thus armed,
and thus manned. Prince Tancred bestowed upon his bark the full
velocity which wind, and tide, and oar, could enable her to obtain, and
placing her in the situation to profit by them as much as his maritime
skill could direct, he drove with the speed of lightning among the
vessels of Lemnos, plying on either side, bows, crossbows, javelins,
and military missiles of every kind, with the greater advantage that
the Greeks, trusting to their artificial fire, had omitted arming
themselves with other weapons; so that when the valiant Crusader bore
down on them with so much fury, repaying the terrors of their fire with
a storm of bolts and arrows no less formidable, they began to feel that
their own advantage was much less than they had supposed, and that,
like most other dangers, the maritime fire of the Greeks, when
undauntedly confronted, lost at least one-half of its terrors. The
Grecian sailors, too, when they observed the vessels approach so near,
filled with the steel-clad Latins, began to shrink from a contest to be
maintained hand to hand with so terrible an enemy.

By degrees, smoke began to issue from the sides of the great Grecian
argosy, and the voice of Tancred announced to his soldiers that the
Grecian Admiral's vessel had taken fire, owing to negligence in the
management of the means of destruction she possessed, and that all they
had now to do was to maintain such a distance as to avoid sharing her
fate. Sparkles and flashes of flame were next seen leaping from place
to place on board of the great hulk, as if the element had had the
sense and purpose of spreading wider the consternation, and disabling
the few who still paid attention to the commands of their Admiral, and
endeavoured to extinguish the fire. The consciousness of the
combustible nature of the freight, began to add despair to terror; from
the boltsprit, the rigging, the yards, the sides, and every part of the
vessel, the unfortunate crew were seen dropping themselves, to exchange
for the most part a watery death for one by the more dreadful agency of
fire. The crew of Tancred's bark, ceasing, by that generous prince's
commands, to offer any additional annoyance to an enemy who was at once
threatened by the perils of the ocean and of conflagration, ran their
vessel ashore in a smooth part of the bay, and jumping into the shallow
sea, made the land without difficulty; many of their steeds being, by
the exertions of the owners, and the docility of the animals, brought
ashore at the same time with their masters. Their commander lost no
time in forming their serried ranks into a phalanx of lancers, few
indeed at first, but perpetually increasing as ship after ship of the
little flotilla ran ashore, or, having more deliberately moored their
barks, landed their men, and joined their companions.

The cloud which had been raised by the conflict was now driven to
leeward before the wind, and the strait exhibited only the relics of
the combat. Here tossed upon the billows the scattered and broken
remains of one or two of the Latin vessels which had been burnt at the
commencement of the combat, though their crews, by the exertions of
their comrades, had in general been saved. Lower down were seen the
remaining five vessels of the Lemnos squadron, holding a disorderly and
difficult retreat, with the purpose of gaining the harbour of
Constantinople. In the place so late the scene of combat, lay moored
the hulk of the Grecian Admiral, burnt to the water's edge, and still
sending forth a black smoke from its scathed beams and planks. The
flotilla of Tancred, busied in discharging its troops, lay irregularly
scattered along the bay, the men making ashore as they could, and
taking their course to join the standard of their leader. Various black
substances floated on the surface of the water, nearer, or more distant
to the shore; some proved to be the wreck of the vessels which had been
destroyed, and others, more ominous still, the lifeless bodies of
mariners who had fallen in the conflict.

The standard had been borne ashore by the Prince's favourite page,
Ernest of Apulia, so soon as the keel of Tancred's galley had grazed
upon the sand. It was then pitched on the top of that elevated cape
between Constantinople and the lists, where Lascaris, Demetrius, and
other gossips, had held their station at the commencement of the
engagement, but from which all had fled, between the mingled dread of
the Greek fire and the missiles of the Latin crusaders.




CHAPTER THE THIRTIETH.


Sheathed in complete armour, and supporting with his right hand the
standard of his fathers, Tancred remained with his handful of warriors
like so many statues of steel, expecting some sort of attack from the
Grecian party which had occupied the lists, or from the numbers whom
the city gates began now to pour forth--soldiers some of them, and
others citizens, many of whom were arrayed as if for conflict. These
persons, alarmed by the various accounts which were given of the
combatants, and the progress of the fight, rushed towards the standard
of Prince Tancred, with the intention of beating it to the earth, and
dispersing the guards who owed it homage and defence. But if the reader
shall have happened to have ridden at any time through a pastoral
country, with a clog of a noble race following him, he must have
remarked, in the deference ultimately paid to the high-bred animal by
the shepherd's cur as he crosses the lonely glen, of which the latter
conceives himself the lord and guardian, something very similar to the
demeanour of the incensed Greeks, when they approached near to the
little band of Franks. At the first symptom of the intrusion of a
stranger, the dog of the shepherd starts from his slumbers, and rushes
towards the noble intruder with a clamorous declaration of war; but
when the diminution of distance between them shows to the aggressor the
size and strength of his opponent, he becomes like a cruiser, who, in a
chase, has, to his surprise and alarm, found two tier of guns opposed
to him instead of one. He halts--suspends his clamorous yelping, and,
in fine, ingloriously retreats to his master, with, all the
dishonourable marks of positively declining the combat.

It was in this manner that the troops of the noisy Greeks, with much
hallooing and many a boastful shout, hastened both from the town and
from the lists, with the apparent intention of sweeping from the field
the few companions of Tancred. As they advanced, however, within the
power of remarking the calm and regular order of those men who had
landed, and arranged themselves under this noble chieftain's banner,
their minds were altogether changed as to the resolution of instant
combat; their advance became an uncertain and staggering gait, their
heads were more frequently turned back to the point from which they
came, than towards the enemy; and their desire to provoke an instant
scuffle vanished totally, when there did not appear the least symptom
that their opponents cared about the matter.

It added to the extreme confidence with which the Latins kept their
ground, that they were receiving frequent, though small reinforcements
from their comrades, who were landing by detachments all along the
beach; and that, in the course of a short hour, their amount had been
raised, on horseback and foot, to a number, allowing for a few
casualties, not much less than that which set sail from Scutari.

Another reason why the Latins remained unassailed, was certainly the
indisposition of the two principal armed parties on shore to enter into
a quarrel with them. The guards of every kind, who were faithful to the
Emperor, more especially the Varangians, had their orders to remain
firm at their posts, some in the lists, and others at various places of
rendezvous in Constantinople, where their presence was necessary to
prevent the effects of the sudden insurrection which Alexius knew to be
meditated against him. These, therefore, made no hostile demonstration
towards the band of Latins, nor was it the purpose of the Emperor they
should do so.

On the other hand, the greater part of the Immortal Guards, and those
citizens who were prepared to play a part in the conspiracy, had been
impressed by the agents of the deceased Agelastes with the opinion,
that this band of Latins, commanded by Tancred, the relative of
Bohemond, had been despatched by the latter to their assistance. These
men, therefore, stood still, and made no attempt to guide or direct the
popular efforts of such as inclined to attack these unexpected
visitors; in which purpose, therefore, no very great party were united,
while the majority were willing enough to find an apology for remaining
quiet.

In the meantime, the Emperor, from his palace of Blacquernal, observed
what passed upon the straits, and beheld his navy from Lemnos totally
foiled in their attempt, by means of the Greek fire, to check, the
intended passage of Tancred and his men. He had no sooner seen the
leading ship of the squadron, begin to beacon the darkness with its own
fire, than the Emperor formed a secret resolution to disown the
unfortunate Admiral, and make peace with the Latins, if that should be
absolutely necessary, by sending them his head. He had hardly,
therefore, seen the flames burst forth, and the rest of the vessels
retreat from their moorings, than in his own mind, the doom of the
unfortunate Phraortes, for such was the name of the Admiral, was signed
and sealed.

Achilles Tatius, at the same instant, determining to keep a close eye
upon the Emperor at this important crisis, came precipitately into the
palace, with an appearance of great alarm.

"My Lord!---my Imperial Lord! I am unhappy to be the messenger of such
unlucky news; but the Latins have in great numbers succeeded in
crossing the strait from Scutari. The Lemnos squadron endeavoured to
stop them, as was last night determined upon in the Imperial Council of
War. By a heavy discharge of the Greek fire, one or two of the
crusaders' vessels were consumed, but by far the greater number of them
pushed on their course, burnt the leading ship of the unfortunate
Phraortes, and It is strongly reported he has himself perished, with
almost all his men. The rest have cut their cables, and abandoned the
defence of the passage of the Hellespont."

"And you, Achilles Tatius," said the Emperor, "with what purpose is it
that you now bring me this melancholy news, at a period so late, when I
cannot amend the consequences!"

"Under favour, most gracious Emperor," replied the conspirator, not
without colouring and stammering, "such was not my intention--I had
hoped to submit a plan, by which I might easily have prepared the way
for correcting this little error."

"Well, your plan, sir?" said the Emperor, dryly.

"With your sacred Majesty's leave," said the Acolyte, "I would myself
have undertaken instantly to lead against this Tancred and his Italians
the battle-axes of the faithful Varangian guard, who will make no more
account of the small number of Franks who have come ashore, than the
farmer holds of the hordes of rats and mice, and such like mischievous
vermin, who have harboured in his granaries."

"And what mean you," said the Emperor, "that I am to do, while my
Anglo-Saxons fight for my sake?"

"Your Majesty," replied Achilles, not exactly satisfied with the dry
and caustic manner in which the Emperor addressed him, "may put
yourself at the head of the Immortal cohorts of Constantinople; and I
am your security, that you may either perfect the victory over the
Latins, or at least redeem the most distant chance of a defeat, by
advancing at the head of this choice body of domestic troops, should
the day appear doubtful."

"You, yourself, Achilles Tatius," returned the Emperor, "have
repeatedly assured us, that these Immortals retain a perverse
attachment to our rebel Ursel. How is it, then, you would have us
intrust our defence to these bands, when we have engaged our valiant
Varangians in the proposed conflict with the flower of the western
army?--Did you think of this risk, Sir Follower?"

Achilles Tatius, much alarmed at an intimation indicative of his
purpose being known, answered, "That in his haste he had been more
anxious to recommend the plan which should expose his own person to the
greater danger, than that perhaps which was most attended with personal
safety to his Imperial Master."

"I thank you for so doing," said the Emperor; "you have anticipated my
wishes, though it is not in my power at present to follow the advice
you have given me. I would have been well contented, undoubtedly, had
these Latins measured their way over the strait again, as suggested by
last night's council; but since they have arrived, and stand embattled
on our shores, it is better that we pay them with money and with spoil,
than with the lives of our gallant subjects. We cannot, after all,
believe that they come with any serious intention of doing us injury;
it is but the insane desire of witnessing feats of battle and single
combat, which is to them the breath of their nostrils, that can have
impelled them to this partial countermarch. I impose upon you, Achilles
Tatius, combining the Protospathaire in the same commission with you,
the duty of riding up to yonder standard, and learning of their chief,
called the Prince Tancred, if he is there in person, the purpose of his
return, and the cause of his entering into debate with Phraortes and
the Lemnos squadron. If they send us any reasonable excuse, we shall
not be averse to receive it at their hands; for we have not made so
many sacrifices for the preservation of peace, to break forth into war,
if, after all, so great an evil can be avoided. Thou wilt receive,
therefore, with a candid and complacent mind, such apologies as they
may incline to bring forward; and, be assured, that the sight of this
puppet-show of a single combat, will be enough of itself to banish
every other consideration from the reflection of these giddy crusaders."

A knock was at this moment heard at the door of the Emperor's
apartment; and upon the word being given to enter, the Protospathaire
made his appearance. He was arrayed in a splendid suit of ancient Roman
fashioned armour. The want of a visor left his countenance entirely
visible; which, pale and anxious as it was, did not well become the
martial crest and dancing plume with which it was decorated. He
received the commission already mentioned with the less alacrity,
because the Acolyte was added to him as his colleague; for, as the
reader may have observed, these two officers were of separate factions
in the army, and on indifferent terms with each other. Neither did the
Acolyte consider his being united in commission with the
Protospathaire, as a mark either of the Emperor's confidence, or of his
own safety. He was, however, in the meantime, in the Blacquernal, where
the slaves of the interior made not the least hesitation, when ordered,
to execute any officer of the court. The two generals had, therefore,
no other alternative, than that which is allowed to two greyhounds who
are reluctantly coupled together. The hope of Achilles Tatius was, that
he might get safely through his mission to Tancred, after which he
thought the successful explosion of the conspiracy might take place and
have its course, either as a matter desired and countenanced by those
Latins, or passed over as a thing in which they took no interest on
either side.

By the parting order of the Emperor, they were to mount on horseback at
the sounding of the great Varangian trumpet, put themselves at the head
of those Anglo-Saxon guards in the court-yard of their barrack, and
await the Emperor's further orders.

There was something in this arrangement which pressed hard on the
conscience of Achilles Tatius, yet he was at a loss to justify his
apprehensions to himself, unless from a conscious feeling of his own
guilt, he felt, however, that in being detained, under pretence of an
honourable mission, at the head of the Varangians, he was deprived of
the liberty of disposing of himself, by which he had hoped to
communicate with the Caesar and Hereward, whom he reckoned upon as his
active accomplices, not knowing that the first was at this moment a
prisoner in the Blacquernal, where Alexius had arrested him in the
apartments of the Empress, and that the second was the most important
support of Comnenus during the whole of that eventful day.

When the gigantic trumpet of the Varangian guards sent forth its deep
signal through the city, the Protospathaire hurried Achilles along with
him to the rendezvous of the Varangians, and on the way said to him, in
an easy and indifferent tone, "As the Emperor is in the field in
person, you, his representative, or Follower, will of course transmit
no orders to the body guard, except such as shall receive their origin
from himself, so that you will consider your authority as this day
suspended."

"I regret," said Achilles, "that there should have seemed any cause for
such precautions; I had hoped my own truth and fidelity--but--I am
obsequious to his imperial pleasure in all things."

"Such are his orders," said the other officer, "and you know under what
penalty obedience is enforced."

"If I did not," said Achilles, "the composition of this body of guards
would remind me, since it comprehends not only great part of those
Varangians, who are the immediate defenders of the Emperor's throne,
but those slaves of the interior, who are the executioners of his
pleasure." To this the Protospathaire returned no answer, while the
more closely the Acolyte looked upon the guard which attended, to the
unusual number of nearly three thousand men, the more had he reason to
believe that he might esteem himself fortunate, if, by the intervention
of either the Caesar, Agelastes, or Hereward, he could pass to the
conspirators a signal to suspend the intended explosion, which seemed
to be provided against by the Emperor with unusual caution. He would
have given the full dream of empire, with which he had been for a short
time lulled to sleep, to have seen but a glimpse of the azure plume of
Nicephorus, the white mantle of the philosopher, or even a glimmer of
Hereward's battle-axe. No such objects could be seen anywhere, and not
a little was the faithless Follower displeased to see that whichever
way he turned his eyes, those of the Protospathaire, but especially of
the trusty domestic officers of the empire, seemed to follow and watch
their occupation.

Amidst the numerous soldiers whom he saw on all sides, his eye did not
recognise a single man with whom he could exchange a friendly or
confidential glance, and he stood in all that agony of terror, which is
rendered the more discomfiting, because the traitor is conscious that,
beset by various foes, his own fears are the most likely of all to
betray him. Internally, as the danger seemed to increase, and as his
alarmed imagination attempted to discern new reasons for it, he could
only conclude that either one of the three principal conspirators, or
at least some of the inferiors, had turned informers; and his doubt
was, whether he should not screen his own share of what had been
premeditated, by flinging himself at the feet of the Emperor, and
making a full confession. But still the fear of being premature in
having recourse to such base means of saving himself, joined to the
absence of the Emperor, united to keep within his lips a secret, which
concerned not only all his future fortunes, but life itself. He was in
the meantime, therefore, plunged as it were in a sea of trouble and
uncertainty, while the specks of land, which seemed to promise him
refuge, were distant, dimly seen, and extremely difficult of attainment.




CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FIRST.

     To-morrow--oh, that's sudden! Spare him, spare him!
     He's not prepared to die.
                                              SHAKSPEARE.


At the moment when Achilles Tatius, with a feeling of much insecurity,
awaited the unwinding of the perilous skein of state politics, a
private council of the Imperial family was held in the hall termed the
Temple of the Muses, repeatedly distinguished as the apartment in which
the Princess Anna Comnena was wont to make her evening recitations to
those who were permitted the honour of hearing prelections of her
history. The council consisted of the Empress Irene, the Princess
herself, and the Emperor, with the Patriarch of the Greek Church, as a
sort of mediator between a course of severity and a dangerous degree of
lenity.

"Tell not me, Irene," said the Emperor, "of the fine things attached to
the praise of mercy. Here have I sacrificed my just revenge over my
rival Ursel, and what good do I obtain by it? Why, the old obstinate
man, instead of being tractable, and sensible of the generosity which
has spared his life and eyes, can be with difficulty brought to exert
himself in favour of the Prince to whom he owes them. I used to think
that eyesight and the breath of life were things which one would
preserve at any sacrifice; but, on the contrary, I now believe men
value them like mere toys. Talk not to me, therefore, of the gratitude
to be excited by saving this ungrateful cub; and believe me, girl,"
turning to Anna, "that not only will all my subjects, should I follow
your advice, laugh at me for sparing a man so predetermined to work my
ruin, but even thou thyself wilt be the first to upbraid me with the
foolish kindness thou art now so anxious to extort from me."

"Your Imperial pleasure, then," said the Patriarch, "is fixed that your
unfortunate son-in-law shall suffer death for his accession to this
conspiracy, deluded by that heathen villain Agelastes, and the
traitorous Achilles Tatius?"

"Such is my purpose," said the Emperor; "and in evidence that I mean
not again to pass over a sentence of this kind with a seeming execution
only, as in the case of Ursel, this ungrateful traitor of ours shall be
led from the top of the staircase, or ladder of Acheron, as it is
called, through the large chamber named the Hall of Judgment, at the
upper end of which are arranged the apparatus for execution, by which I
swear"----

"Swear not at all!" said the Patriarch; "I forbid thee, in the name of
that Heaven whose voice (though unworthy) speaks in my person, to
quench the smoking flax, or destroy the slight hope which there may
remain, that you may finally be persuaded to alter your purpose
respecting your misguided son-in-law, within the space allotted to him
to sue for your mercy. Remember, I pray you, the remorse of
Constantine."

"What means your reverence?" said Irene.

"A trifle," replied the Emperor, "not worthy being quoted from such a
mouth as the Patriarch's, being, as it probably is, a relic of
paganism."

"What is it?" exclaimed the females anxiously, in the hope of hearing
something which might strengthen their side of the argument, and
something moved, perhaps, by curiosity, a motive which seldom slumbers
in a female bosom, even when the stronger passions are in arms.

"The Patriarch will tell you," answered Alexius, "since you must needs
know; though I promise you, you will not receive any assistance in your
argument from a silly legendary tale."

"Hear it, however," said the Patriarch; "for though it is a tale of the
olden time, and sometimes supposed to refer to the period when
heathenism predominated, it is no less true, that it was a vow made and
registered in the chancery of the rightful Deity, by an Emperor of
Greece."

"What I am now to relate to you," continued he, "is, in truth, a tale
not only of a Christian Emperor, but of him who made the whole empire
Christian; and of that very Constantine, who was also the first who
declared Constantinople to be the metropolis of the empire. This hero,
remarkable alike for his zeal for religion and for his warlike
achievements, was crowned by Heaven with repeated victory, and with all
manner of blessings, save that unity in his family which wise men are
most ambitious to possess. Not only was the blessing of concord among
brethren denied to the family of this triumphant Emperor, but a
deserving son of mature age, who had been supposed to aspire to share
the throne with his father, was suddenly, and at midnight, called upon
to enter his defence against a capital charge of treason. You will
readily excuse my referring to the arts by which the son was rendered
guilty in the eyes of the father. Be it enough to say, that the
unfortunate young man fell a victim to the guilt of his step-mother,
Fausta, and that he disdained to exculpate himself from a charge so
gross and so erroneous. It is said, that the anger of the Emperor was
kept up against his son by the sycophants who called upon Constantine
to observe that the culprit disdained even to supplicate for mercy, or
vindicate his innocence from so foul a charge.

"But the death-blow had no sooner struck the innocent youth, than his
father obtained proof of the rashness with which he had acted. He had
at this period been engaged in constructing the subterranean parts of
the Blacquernal palace, which his remorse appointed to contain a record
of his paternal grief and contrition. At the upper part of the
staircase, called the Pit of Acheron, he caused to be constructed a
large chamber, still called the Hall of Judgment, for the purpose of
execution. A passage through an archway in the upper wall leads from
the hall to the place of misery, where the axe, or other engine, is
disposed for the execution of state prisoners of consequence. Over this
archway was placed a species of marble altar, surmounted by an image of
the unfortunate Crispus--the materials were gold, and it bore the
memorable inscription, TO MY SON, WHOM I RASHLY CONDEMNED, AND TOO
HASTILY EXECUTED. When constructing this passage, Constantine made a
vow, that he himself and his posterity, being reigning Emperors, would
stand beside the statue of Crispus, at the time when any individual of
their family should be led to execution, and before they suffered him
to pass from the Hall of Judgment to the Chamber of Death, that they
should themselves be personally convinced of the truth of the charge
under which he suffered.

"Time rolled on--the memory of Constantine was remembered almost like
that of a saint, and the respect paid to it threw into shadow the
anecdote of his son's death. The exigencies of the state rendered it
difficult to keep so large a sum in specie invested in a statue, which
called to mind the unpleasant failings of so great a man. Your Imperial
Highness's predecessors applied the metal which formed the statue to
support the Turkish wars; and the remorse and penance of Constantine
died away in an obscure tradition of the Church or of the palace.
Still, however, unless your Imperial Majesty has strong reasons to the
contrary, I shall give it as my opinion, that you will hardly achieve
what is due to the memory of the greatest of your predecessors, unless
you give this unfortunate criminal, being so near a relation of your
own, an opportunity of pleading his cause before passing by the altar
of refuge; being the name which is commonly given to the monument of
the unfortunate Crispus, son of Constantine, although now deprived both
of the golden letters which composed the inscription, and the golden
image which represented the royal sufferer."

A mournful strain of music was now heard to ascend the stair so often
mentioned.

"If I must hear the Caesar Nicephorus Briennius, ere he pass the altar
of refuge, there must be no loss of time," said the Emperor; "for these
melancholy sounds announce that he has already approached the Hall of
Judgment."

Both the Imperial ladies began instantly, with the utmost earnestness,
to deprecate the execution of the Caesar's doom, and to conjure
Alexius, as he hoped for quiet in his household, and the everlasting
gratitude of his wife and daughter, that he would listen to their
entreaties in behalf of an unfortunate man, who had been seduced into
guilt, but not from his heart.

"I will at least see him," said the Emperor, "and the holy vow of
Constantine shall be in the present instance strictly observed. But
remember, you foolish women, that the state of Crispus and the present
Caesar, is as different as guilt from innocence, and that their fates,
therefore, may be justly decided upon opposite principles, and with
opposite results. But I will confront this criminal; and you,
Patriarch, may be present to render what help is in your power to a
dying man; for you, the wife and mother of the traitor, you will,
methinks, do well to retire to the church, and pray God for the soul of
the deceased, rather than disturb his last moments with unavailing
lamentations."

"Alexius," said the Empress Irene, "I beseech you to be contented; be
assured that we will not leave you in this dogged humour of
blood-shedding, lest you make such materials for history as are fitter
for the time of Nero than of Constantine."

The Emperor, without reply, led the way into the Hall of Judgment,
where a much stronger light than usual was already shining up the stair
of Acheron, from which were heard to sound, by sullen and intermitted
fits, the penitential psalms which the Greek Church has appointed to be
sung at executions. Twenty mute slaves, the pale colour of whose
turbans gave a ghastly look to the withered cast of their features, and
the glaring whiteness of their eyeballs, ascended two by two, as it
were from the bowels of the earth, each of them bearing in one hand a
naked sabre, and in the other a lighted torch. After these came the
unfortunate Nicephorus; his looks were those of a man half-dead from
the terror of immediate dissolution, and what he possessed of remaining
attention, was turned successively to two black-stoled monks, who were
anxiously repeating religious passages to him alternately from the
Greek scripture, and the form of devotion adopted by the court of
Constantinople. The Caesar's dress also corresponded to his mournful
fortunes: His legs and arms were bare, and a simple white tunic, the
neck of which was already open, showed that ho had assumed the garments
which were to serve his last turn. A tall muscular Nubian slave, who
considered himself obviously as the principal person in the procession,
bore on his shoulder a large heavy headsman's axe, and, like a demon
waiting on a sorcerer, stalked step for step after his victim. The rear
of the procession was closed by a band of four priests, each of whom
chanted from time to time the devotional psalm which was thundered
forth on the occasion; and another of slaves, armed with bows and
quivers, and with lances, to resist any attempt at rescue, if such
should be offered.

It would have required a harder heart than that of the unlucky princess
to have resisted this gloomy apparatus of fear and sorrow, surrounding,
at the same time directed against, a beloved object, the lover of her
youth, and the husband of her bosom, within a few minutes of the
termination of his mortal career.

As the mournful train approached towards the altar of refuge,
half-encircled as it now was by the two great and expanded arms which
projected from the wall, the Emperor, who stood directly in the
passage, threw upon the flame of the altar some chips of aromatic wood,
steeped in spirit of wine, which, leaping at once into a blaze,
illuminated the doleful procession, the figure of the principal
culprit, and the slaves, who had most of them extinguished their
flambeaux so soon as they had served the purpose of lighting them up
the staircase.

The sudden light spread from the altar failed not to make the Emperor
and the Princess visible to the mournful group which approached through
the hall. All halted--all were silent. It was a meeting, as the
Princess has expressed herself in her historical work, such as took
place betwixt Ulysses and the inhabitants of the other world, who, when
they tasted of the blood of his sacrifices, recognised him indeed, but
with empty lamentations, and gestures feeble and shadowy. The hymn of
contrition sunk also into silence; and, of the whole group, the only
figure rendered more distinct, was the gigantic executioner, whose high
and furrowed forehead, as well as the broad steel of his axe, caught
and reflected back the bright gleam from the altar. Alexius saw the
necessity of breaking the silence which ensued, lest it should, give
the intercessors for the prisoner an opportunity of renewing their
entreaties.

"Nicephorus Briennius," he said, with a voice which, although generally
interrupted by a slight hesitation, which procured him, among his
enemies, the nickname of the Stutterer, yet, upon important occasions
like the present, was so judiciously tuned and balanced in its
sentences, that no such defect was at all visible--"Nicephorus
Briennius," he said, "late Caesar, the lawful doom hath been spoken,
that, having conspired against the life of thy rightful sovereign and
affectionate father, Alexius Comnenus, thou shalt suffer the
appropriate sentence, by having thy head struck from thy body. Here,
therefore, at the last altar of refuge, I meet thee, according to the
vow of the immortal Constantine, for the purpose of demanding whether
thou hast any thing to allege why this doom should not be executed?
Even at this eleventh hour, thy tongue is unloosed to speak with
freedom what may concern thy life. All is prepared in this world and in
the next. Look forward beyond yon archway--the block is fixed. Look
behind thee, thou seest the axe already sharpened--thy place for good
or evil in the next world is already determined--time flies--eternity
approaches. If thou hast aught to say, speak it freely--if nought,
confess the justice of thy sentence, and pass on to death."

The Emperor commenced this oration, with those looks described by his
daughter as so piercing, that they dazzled like lightning, and his
periods, if not precisely flowing like burning lava, were yet the
accents of a man having the power of absolute command, and as such
produced an effect not only on the criminal, but also upon the Prince
himself, whose watery eyes and faltering voice acknowledged his sense
and feeling of the fatal import of the present moment.

Rousing himself to the conclusion of what he had commenced, the Emperor
again demanded whether the prisoner had any thing to say in his own
defence.

Nicephorus was not one of those hardened criminals who may be termed
the very prodigies of history, from the coolness with which they
contemplated the consummation of their crimes, whether in their own
punishment, or the misfortunes of others. "I have been tempted," he
said, dropping on his knees, "and I have fallen. I have nothing to
allege in excuse of my folly and ingratitude; but I stand prepared to
die to expiate my guilt," A deep sigh, almost amounting to a scream,
was here heard, close behind the Emperor, and its cause assigned by the
sudden exclamation of Irene,--"My lord! my lord! your daughter is
gone!" And in fact Anna Comnena had sunk into her mother's arms without
either sense or motion. The father's attention was instantly called to
support his swooning child, while the unhappy husband strove with the
guards to be permitted to go to the assistance of his wife. "Give me
but five minutes of that time which the law has abridged--let my
efforts but assist in recalling her to a life which should be as long
as her virtues and her talents deserve; and then let me die at her
feet, for I care not to go an inch beyond."

The Emperor, who in fact had been more astonished at the boldness and
rashness of Nicephorus, than alarmed by his power, considered him as a
man rather misled than misleading others, and felt, therefore, the full
effect of this last interview. He was, besides, not naturally cruel,
where severities were to be enforced under his own eye.

"The divine and immortal Constantine," he said, "did not, I am
persuaded, subject his descendants to this severe trial, in order
further to search out the innocence of the criminals, but rather to
give to those who came after him an opportunity of generously forgiving
a crime which could not, without pardon--the express pardon of the
Prince--escape unpunished. I rejoice that I am born of the willow
rather than of the oak, and I acknowledge my weakness, that not even
the safety of my own life, or resentment of this unhappy man's
treasonable machinations, have the same effect with me as the tears of
my wife, and the swooning of my daughter. Rise up, Nicephorus
Briennius, freely pardoned, and restored even to the rank of Caesar. We
will direct thy pardon to be made out by the great Logothete, and
sealed with the golden bull. For four-and-twenty hours thou art a
prisoner, until an arrangement is made for preserving the public peace.
Meanwhile, thou wilt remain under the charge of the Patriarch, who will
be answerable for thy forthcoming.--Daughter and wife, you must now go
hence to your own apartment; a future time will come, during which you
may have enough of weeping and embracing, mourning and rejoicing. Pray
Heaven that I, who, having been trained on till I have sacrificed
justice and true policy to uxorious compassion and paternal tenderness
of heart, may not have cause at last for grieving in good earnest for
all the events of this miscellaneous drama."

The pardoned Caesar, who endeavoured to regulate his ideas according to
this unexpected change, found it as difficult to reconcile himself to
the reality of his situation as Ursel to the face of nature, after
having been long deprived of enjoying it; so much do the dizziness and
confusion of ideas, occasioned by moral and physical causes of surprise
and terror, resemble each other in their effects on the understanding.

At length he stammered forth a request that he might be permitted to go
to the field with the Emperor, and divert, by the interposition of his
own body, the traitorous blows which some desperate man might aim
against that of his Prince, in a day which was too likely to be one of
danger and bloodshed.

"Hold there!" said Alexius Comnenus;--"we will not begin thy
newly-redeemed life by renewed doubts of thine allegiance; yet it is
but fitting to remind thee, that thou art still the nominal and
ostensible head of those who expect to take a part in this day's
insurrection, and it will be the safest course to trust its
pacification to others than to thee. Go, sir, compare notes with the
Patriarch, and merit your pardon by confessing to him any traitorous
intentions concerning this foul conspiracy with which we may be as yet
unacquainted.--Daughter and wife, farewell! I must now depart for the
lists, where I have to speak with the traitor Achilles Tatius and the
heathenish infidel Agelastes, if he still lives, but of whose
providential death I hear a confirmed rumour."

"Yet do not go, my dearest father!" said the Princess; "but let me
rather go to encourage the loyal subjects in your behalf. The extreme
kindness which you have extended towards my guilty husband, convinces
me of the extent of your affection towards your unworthy daughter, and
the greatness of the sacrifice which you have made to her almost
childish affection for an ungrateful man who put your life in danger."

"That is to say, daughter," said the Emperor, smiling, "that the pardon
of your husband is a boon which has lost its merit when it is granted.
Take my advice, Anna, and think otherwise; wives and their husbands
ought in prudence to forget their offences towards each other as soon
as human nature will permit them. Life is too short, and conjugal
tranquillity too uncertain, to admit of dwelling long upon such
irritating subjects. To your apartments, Princesses, and prepare the
scarlet-buskins, and the embroidery which is displayed on the cuffs and
collars of the Caesar's robe, indicative of his high rank. He must not
be seen without them on the morrow.--Reverend father, I remind you once
more that the Caesar is in your personal custody from this moment until
to-morrow at the same hour."

They parted; the Emperor repairing to put himself at the head of his
Varangian guards--the Caesar, under the superintendence of the
Patriarch, withdrawing into the interior of the Blacquernal Palace,
where Nicephorus Briennius was under the necessity of "unthreading the
rude eye of rebellion," and throwing such lights as were in his power
upon the progress of the conspiracy.

"Agelastes," he said, "Achilles Tatius, and Hereward the Varangian,
were the persons principally entrusted in its progress. But whether
they had been all true to their engagements, he did not pretend to be
assured."

In the female apartments, there was a violent discussion betwixt Anna
Comnena and her mother. The Princess had undergone during the day many
changes of sentiment and feeling; and though they had finally united
themselves into one strong interest in her husband's favour, yet no
sooner was the fear of his punishment removed, than the sense of his
ungrateful behaviour began to revive. She became sensible also that a
woman of her extraordinary attainments, who had been by a universal
course of flattery disposed to entertain a very high opinion of her own
consequence, made rather a poor figure when she had been the passive
subject of a long series of intrigues, by which she was destined to be
disposed of in one way or the other, according to the humour of a set
of subordinate conspirators, who never so much as dreamed of regarding
her as a being capable of forming a wish in her own behalf, or even
yielding or refusing a consent. Her father's authority over her, and
right to dispose of her, was less questionable; but even then it was
something derogatory to the dignity of a Princess born in the
purple--an authoress besides, and giver of immortality--to be, without
her own consent, thrown, as it were, at the head now of one suitor, now
of another, however mean or disgusting, whose alliance could for the
time benefit the Emperor. The consequence of these moody reflections,
was that Anna Comnena deeply toiled in spirit for the discovery of some
means by which she might assert her sullied dignity, and various were
the expedients which she revolved.




CHAPTER THE THIRTY-SECOND.

     But now the hand of fate is on the curtain,
     And brings the scene to light.
                                   DON SEBASTIAN.


The gigantic trumpet of the Varangians sounded its loudest note of
march, and the squadrons of the faithful guards, sheathed in complete
mail, and enclosing in their centre the person of their Imperial
master, set forth upon their procession through the streets of
Constantinople. The form of Alexius, glittering in his splendid armour,
seemed no unmeet central point for the force of an empire; and while
the citizens crowded in the train of him and his escort, there might be
seen a visible difference between those who came with the premeditated
intention of tumult, and the greater part, who, like the multitude of
every great city, thrust each other and shout for rapture on account of
any cause for which a crowd may be collected together. The hope of the
conspirators was lodged chiefly in the Immortal Guards, who were levied
principally for the defence of Constantinople, partook of the general
prejudices of the citizens, and had been particularly influenced by
those in favour of Ursel, by whom, previous to his imprisonment, they
had themselves been commanded. The conspirators had determined that
those of this body who were considered as most discontented, should
early in the morning take possession of the posts in the lists most
favourable for their purpose of assaulting the Emperor's person. But,
in spite of all efforts short of actual violence, for which the time
did not seem to be come, they found themselves disappointed in this
purpose, by parties of the Varangian guards, planted with apparent
carelessness, but in fact, with perfect skill, for the prevention of
their enterprise. Somewhat confounded at perceiving that a design,
which they could not suppose to be suspected, was, nevertheless, on
every part controlled and counter-checked, the conspirators began to
look for the principal persons of their own party, on whom they
depended for orders in this emergency; but neither the Caesar nor
Agelastes was to be seen, whether in the lists or on the military march
from Constantinople: and though Achilles Tatius rode in the latter
assembly, yet it might be clearly observed that he was rather attending
upon the Protospathaire, than, assuming that independence as an officer
which he loved to affect.

In this manner, as the Emperor with his glittering bands approached the
phalanx of Tancred and his followers, who were drawn up, it will be
remembered, upon a rising cape between the city and the lists, the main
body of the Imperial procession deflected in some degree from the
straight road, in order to march past them without interruption; while
the Protospathaire and the Acolyte passed under the escort of a band of
Varangians, to bear the Emperor's inquiries to Prince Tancred,
concerning the purpose of his being there with his band. The short
march was soon performed--the large trumpet which attended the two
officers sounded a parley, and Tancred himself, remarkable for that
personal beauty which Tasso has preferred to any of the crusaders,
except Rinaldo d'Este, the creatures of his own poetical imagination,
advanced to parley with them.

"The Emperor of Greece," said the Protospathaire to Tancred, "requires
the Prince of Otranto to show, by the two high officers who shall
deliver him this message, with what purpose he has returned, contrary
to his oath, to the right side of these straits; assuring Prince
Tancred at the same time, that nothing will so much please the Emperor,
as to receive an answer not at variance with his treaty with the Duke
of Bouillon, and the oath which was taken by the crusading nobles and
their soldiers; since that would enable the Emperor, in conformity to
his own wishes, by his kind reception of Prince Tancred and his troop,
to show how high is his estimation of the dignity of the one, and the
bravery of both--We wait an answer."

The tone of the message had nothing in it very alarming, and its
substance cost Prince Tancred very little trouble to answer. "The
cause," he said, "of the Prince of Otranto appearing here with fifty
lances, is this cartel, in which a combat is appointed betwixt
Nicephorus Briennius, called the Caesar, a high member of this empire,
and a worthy knight of great fame, the partner of the Pilgrims who have
taken the Cross, in their high vow to rescue Palestine from the
infidels. The name of the said Knight is the redoubted Robert of Paris.
It becomes, therefore, an obligation, indispensable upon the Holy
Pilgrims of the Crusade, to send one chief of their number, with a body
of men-at-arms, sufficient to see, as is usual, fair play between the
combatants. That such is their intention, may be seen from, their
sending no more than fifty lances, with their furniture and following;
whereas it would have cost them no trouble to have detached ten times
the number, had they nourished any purpose of interfering by force, or
disturbing the fair combat which is about to take place. The Prince of
Otranto, therefore, and his followers, will place themselves at the
disposal of the Imperial Court, and witness the proceedings of the
combat, with the most perfect confidence that the rules of fair battle
will be punctually observed."

The two Grecian officers transmitted this reply to the Emperor, who
heard it with pleasure, and immediately proceeding to act upon the
principle which he had laid down, of maintaining peace, if possible,
with the crusaders, named Prince Tancred with the Protospathaire as
Field Marshals of the lists, fully empowered, under the Emperor, to
decide all the terms of the combat, and to have recourse to Alexius
himself where their opinions disagreed. This was made known to the
assistants, who were thus prepared for the entry into the lists of the
Grecian officer and the Italian Prince in full armour, while a
proclamation announced to all the spectators their solemn office. The
same annunciation commanded the assistants of every kind to clear a
convenient part of the seats which surrounded the lists on one side,
that it might serve for the accommodation of Prince Tancred's followers.

Achilles Tatius, who was a heedful observer of all these passages, saw
with alarm, that by the last collocation the armed Latins were
interposed between the Immortal Guards and the discontented citizens,
which made it most probable that the conspiracy was discovered, and
that Alexius found he had a good right to reckon upon the assistance of
Tancred and his forces in the task of suppressing it. This, added to
the cold and caustic manner in which the Emperor communicated his
commands to him, made the Acolyte of opinion, that his best chance of
escape from the danger in which he was now placed, was, that the whole
conspiracy should fall to the ground, and that the day should pass
without the least attempt to shake the throne of Alexius Comnenus. Even
then it continued highly doubtful, whether a despot, so wily and so
suspicious as the Emperor, would think it sufficient to rest satisfied
with the private knowledge of the undertaking, and its failure, with
which he appeared to be possessed, without putting into exercise the
bow-strings and the blinding-irons of the mutes of the interior. There
was, however, little possibility either of flight or of resistance. The
least attempt to withdraw himself from the neighbourhood of those
faithful followers of the Emperor, personal foes of his own, by whom he
was gradually and more closely surrounded, became each moment more
perilous, and more certain to provoke a rupture, which it was the
interest of the weaker party to delay, with whatever difficulty. And
while the soldiers under Achilles's immediate authority seemed still to
treat him as their superior officer, and appeal to him for the word of
command, it became more and more evident that the slightest degree of
suspicion which should be excited, would be the instant signal for his
being placed under arrest. With a trembling heart, therefore, and eyes
dimmed by the powerful idea of soon parting with the light of day, and
all that it made visible, the Acolyte saw himself condemned to watch
the turn of circumstances over which he could have no influence, and to
content himself with waiting the result of a drama, in which his own
life was concerned, although the piece was played by others. Indeed, it
seemed as if through the whole assembly some signal was waited for,
which no one was in readiness to give.

The discontented citizens and soldiers looked in vain for Agelastes and
the Caesar, and when they observed the condition of Achilles Tatius, it
seemed such as rather to express doubt and consternation, than to give
encouragement to the hopes they had entertained. Many of the lower
classes, however, felt too secure in their own insignificance to fear
the personal consequences of a tumult, and were desirous, therefore, to
provoke the disturbance, which seemed hushing itself to sleep.

A hoarse murmur, which attained almost the importance of a shout,
exclaimed,--"Justice, justice!--Ursel, Ursel!--The rights of the
Immortal Guards!" &c. At this the trumpet of the Varangians awoke, and
its tremendous tones were heard to peal loudly over the whole assembly,
as the voice of its presiding deity. A dead silence prevailed in the
multitude, and the voice of a herald announced, in the name of Alexius
Comnenus, his sovereign will and pleasure.

"Citizens of the Roman Empire, your complaints, stirred up by factious
men, have reached the ear of your Emperor; you shall yourselves be
witness to his power of gratifying his people. At your request, and
before your own sight, the visual ray which hath been quenched shall be
re-illumined--the mind whose efforts were restricted to the imperfect
supply of individual wants shall be again extended, if such is the
owner's will, to the charge of an ample Theme or division of the
empire. Political jealousy, more hard to receive conviction than the
blind to receive sight, shall yield itself conquered, by the Emperor's
paternal love of his people, and his desire to give them satisfaction.
Ursel, the darling of your wishes, supposed to be long dead, or at
least believed to exist in blinded seclusion, is restored to you well
in health, clear in eyesight, and possessed of every faculty necessary
to adorn the Emperor's favour, or merit the affection of the people."

As the herald thus spoke, a figure, which had hitherto stood shrouded
behind some officers of the interior, now stepped forth, and flinging
from him a dusky veil, in which he was wrapt, appeared in a dazzling
scarlet garment, of which the sleeves and buskins displayed those
ornaments which expressed a rank nearly adjacent to that of the Emperor
himself. He held in his hand a silver truncheon, the badge of delegated
command over the Immortal Guards, and kneeling before the Emperor,
presented it to his hands, intimating a virtual resignation of the
command which it implied. The whole assembly were electrified at the
appearance of a person long supposed either dead, or by cruel means
rendered incapable of public trust. Some recognised the man, whose
appearance and features were not easily forgot, and gratulated him upon
his most unexpected return to the service of his country. Others stood
suspended in amazement, not knowing whether to trust their eyes, while
a few determined malecontents eagerly pressed upon the assembly an
allegation that the person presented as Ursel was only a counterfeit,
and the whole a trick of the Emperor.

"Speak to them, noble Ursel," said the Emperor. "Tell them, that if I
have sinned against thee, it has been because I was deceived, and that
my disposition to make thee amends is as ample as ever was my purpose
of doing thee wrong."

"Friends and countrymen," said Ursel, turning himself to the assembly,
"his Imperial Majesty permits me to offer my assurance, that if in any
former part of my life I have suffered at his hand, it is more than
wiped out by the feelings of a moment so glorious as this; and that I
am well satisfied, from the present instant, to spend what remains of
my life in the service of the most generous and beneficent of
sovereigns, or, with his permission, to bestow it in preparing, by
devotional exercises, for an infinite immortality to be spent in the
society of saints and angels. Whichever choice I shall make, I reckon
that you, my beloved countrymen, who have remembered me so kindly
during years of darkness and captivity, will not fail to afford me the
advantage of your prayers."

This sudden apparition of the long-lost Ursel had too much of that
which elevates and surprises not to captivate the multitude, and they
sealed their reconciliation with three tremendous shouts, which are
said to have shaken the air, that birds, incapable of sustaining
themselves, sunk down exhausted out of their native element.




CHAPTER THE THIRTY-THIRD.

     "What, leave the combat out!" exclaimed the knight.
     "Yea! or we must renounce the Stagyrite.
     So large a crowd the stage will ne'er contain."
     --"Then build a new, or act it on a plain."
                                                POPE.


The sounds of the gratulating shout had expanded over the distant
shores of the Bosphorus by mountain and forest, and died at length in
the farthest echoes, when the people, in the silence which ensued,
appeared to ask each other what next scene was about to adorn a pause
so solemn and a stage so august. The pause would probably have soon
given place to some new clamour, for a multitude, from whatever cause
assembled, seldom remains long silent, had not a new signal from the
Varangian trumpet given notice of a fresh purpose to solicit their
attention. The blast had something in its tone spirit-stirring and yet
melancholy, partaking both of the character of a point of war, and of
the doleful sounds which might be chosen to announce an execution of
peculiar solemnity. Its notes were high and widely extended, and
prolonged and long dwelt upon, as if the brazen clamour had been waked
by something more tremendous than the lungs of mere mortals.

The multitude appeared to acknowledge these awful sounds, which were
indeed such as habitually solicited their attention to Imperial edicts,
of melancholy import, by which rebellions were announced, dooms of
treason discharged, and other tidings of a great and affecting import
intimated to the people of Constantinople. When the trumpet had in its
turn ceased, with its thrilling and doleful notes, to agitate the
immense assembly, the voice of the herald again addressed them.

It announced in a grave and affecting strain, that it sometimes chanced
how the people failed in their duty to a sovereign, who was unto them
as a father, and how it became the painful duty of the prince to use
the rod of correction rather than the olive sceptre of mercy.

"Fortunate," continued the herald, "it is, when the supreme Deity
having taken on himself the preservation of a throne, in beneficence
and justice resembling his own, has also assumed the most painful task
of his earthly delegate, by punishing those whom his unerring judgment
acknowledges as most guilty, and leaving to his substitute the more
agreeable task of pardoning such of those as art has misled, and
treachery hath involved in its snares.

"Such being the case, Greece and its accompanying Themes are called
upon to listen and learn that a villain, namely Agelastes, who had
insinuated himself into the favour of the Emperor, by affection of deep
knowledge and severe virtue, had formed a treacherous plan for the
murder of the Emperor Alexius Comnenus, and a revolution in the state.
This person, who, under pretended wisdom, hid the doctrines of a
heretic and the vices of a sensualist, had found proselytes to his
doctrines even among the Emperor's household, and those persons who
were most bound to him, and down to the lower order, to excite the last
of whom were dispersed a multitude of forged rumours, similar to those
concerning Ursol's death and blindness, of which your own eyes have
witnessed the falsehood."

The people, who had hitherto listened in silence, upon this appeal
broke forth in a clamorous assent. They had scarcely been again silent,
ere the iron-voiced herald continued his proclamation.

"Not Korah, Dathan, and Abiram," he said, "had more justly, or more
directly fallen under the doom of an offended Deity, than this villain,
Agelastes. The steadfast earth gaped to devour the apostate sons of
Israel, but the termination of this wretched man's existence has been,
as far as can now be known, by the direct means of an evil spirit, whom
his own arts had evoked into the upper air. By the spirit, as would
appear by the testimony of a noble lady, and other females, who
witnessed the termination of his life, Agelastes was strangled, a fate
well-becoming his odious crimes. Such a death, even of a guilty man,
must, indeed, be most painful to the humane feelings of the Emperor,
because it involves suffering beyond this world. But the awful
catastrophe carries with it this comfort, that it absolves the Emperor
from the necessity of carrying any farther a vengeance which Heaven
itself seems to have limited to the exemplary punishment of the
principal conspirator. Some changes of offices and situations shall be
made, for the sake of safety and good order; but the secret who had or
who had not, been concerned in this awful crime, shall sleep in the
bosoms of the persons themselves implicated, since the Emperor is
determined to dismiss their offence from his memory, as the effect of a
transient delusion. Let all, therefore, who now hear me, whatever
consciousness they may possess of a knowledge of what was this day
intended, return to their houses, assured that their own thoughts will
be their only punishment. Let them rejoice that Almighty goodness has
saved them from the meditations of their own hearts, and, according to
the affecting language of Scripture,--'Let them repent and sin no more,
lest a worse thing befall them.'"

The voice of the herald then ceased, and was again answered by the
shouts of the audience. These were unanimous; for circumstances
contributed to convince the malecontent party that they stood at the
Sovereign's mercy, and the edict that they heard having shown his
acquaintance with their guilt, it lay at his pleasure to let loose upon
them the strength of the Varangians, while, from the terms on which it
had pleased him to receive Tancred, it was probable that the Apuleian
forces were also at his disposal.

The voices, therefore, of the bulky Stephanos, of Harpax the centurion,
and other rebels, both of the camp and city, were the first to thunder
forth their gratitude for the clemency of the Emperor, and their thanks
to Heaven for his preservation.

The audience, reconciled to the thoughts of the discovered and
frustrated conspiracy, began meantime, according to their custom, to
turn themselves to the consideration of the matter which had more
avowedly called them together, and private whispers, swelling by
degrees into murmurs, began to express the dissatisfaction of the
citizens at being thus long assembled, without receiving any
communication respecting the announced purpose of their meeting.

Alexius was not slow to perceive the tendency of their thoughts; and,
on a signal from his hand, the trumpets blew a point of war, in sounds
far more lively than those which had prefaced the Imperial edict.
"Robert, Count of Paris," then said a herald, "art thou here in thy
place, or by knightly proxy, to answer the challenge brought against
thee by his Imperial Highness Nicephorus Briennius, Caesar of this
empire?"

The Emperor conceived himself to have equally provided against the
actual appearance at this call of either of the parties named, and had
prepared an exhibition of another kind, namely, certain cages, tenanted
by wild animals, which being now loosened should do their pleasure with
each other in the eyes of the assembly. His astonishment and confusion,
therefore, were great, when, as the last note of the proclamation died
in the echo, Count Robert of Paris stood forth, armed cap-a-pie, his
mailed charger led behind him from within the curtained enclosure, at
one end of the lists, as if ready to mount at the signal of the marshal.

The alarm and the shame that were visible in every countenance near the
Imperial presence when no Caesar came forth in like fashion to confront
the formidable Frank, were not of long duration. Hardly had the style
and title of the Count of Paris been duly announced by the heralds, and
their second summons of his antagonist uttered in due form, when a
person, dressed like one of the Varangian Guards, sprung into the
lists, and announced himself as ready to do battle in the name and
place of the Caesar Nicephorus Briennius, and for the honour of the
empire.

Alexius, with the utmost joy, beheld this unexpected assistance, and
readily gave his consent to the bold soldier who stood thus forward in
the hour of utmost need, to take upon himself the dangerous office of
champion. He the more readily acquiesced, as, from the size and
appearance of the soldier, and the gallant bearing he displayed, he had
no doubt of his individual person, and fully confided in his valour.
But Prince Tancred interposed his opposition.

"The lists," he said, "were only open to knights and nobles; or, at any
rate, men were not permitted to meet therein who were not of some
equality of birth and blood; nor could he remain a silent witness where
the laws of chivalry are in such respects forgotten."

"Let Count Robert of Paris," said the Varangian, "look upon my
countenance, and say whether he has not, by promise, removed all
objection to our contest which might be founded upon an inequality of
condition, and let him be judge himself, whether, by meeting me in this
field, he will do more than comply with a compact which he has long
since become bound by."

Count Robert, upon this appeal, advanced and acknowledged, without
further debate, that, notwithstanding their difference of rank, he held
himself bound by his solemn word to give this valiant soldier a meeting
in the field. That he regretted, on account of this gallant man's
eminent virtues, and the high services he had received at his hands,
that they should now stand upon terms of such bloody arbitration; but
since nothing was more common, than that the fate of war called on
friends to meet each other in mortal combat, he would not shrink from
the engagement he had pledged himself to; nor did he think his quality
in the slightest degree infringed or diminished, by meeting in battle a
warrior so well known and of such good account as Hereward, the brave
Varangian. He added, that "he willingly admitted that the combat should
take place on foot, and with the battle-axe, which was the ordinary
weapon of the Varangian guard."

Hereward had stood still, almost like a statue, while this discourse
passed; but when the Count of Paris had made this speech, he inclined
himself towards him with a grateful obeisance, and expressed himself
honoured and gratified by the manly manner in which the Count acquitted
himself, according to his promise, with complete honour and fidelity.

"What we are to do," said Count Robert, with a sigh of regret, which
even his love of battle could not prevent, "let us do quickly; the
heart may be affected, but the hand must do its duty."

Hereward assented, with the additional remark, "Let us then lose no
more time, which is already flying fast." And, grasping his axe, he
stood prepared for combat.

"I also am ready," said Count Robert of Paris, taking the same weapon
from a Varangian soldier, who stood by the lists. Both were immediately
upon the alert, nor did further forms or circumstances put off the
intended duel.

The first blows were given and parried with great caution, and Prince
Tancred and others thought that on the part of Count Robert the caution
was much greater than usual; but, in combat as in food, the appetite
increases with the exercise. The fiercer passions began, as usual, to
awaken with the clash of arms and the sense of deadly blows, some of
which were made with great fury on either side, and parried with
considerable difficulty, and not so completely but that blood flowed on
both their parts. The Greeks looked with astonishment on a single
combat, such as they had seldom witnessed, and held their breath as
they beheld the furious blows dealt by either warrior, and expected
with each stroke the annihilation of one or other of the combatants. As
yet their strength and agility seemed somewhat equally matched,
although those who judged with more pretension to knowledge, were of
opinion, that Count Robert spared putting forth some part of the
military skill for which he was celebrated; and the remark was
generally made and allowed that he had surrendered a great advantage by
not insisting upon his right to fight upon horseback. On the other
hand, it was the general opinion that the gallant Varangian omitted to
take advantage of one or two opportunities afforded him by the heat of
Count Robert's temper, who obviously was incensed at the duration of
the combat.

Accident at length seemed about to decide what had been hitherto an
equal contest. Count Robert, making a feint on one side of his
antagonist, struck him on the other, which was uncovered, with the edge
of his weapon, so that the Varangian reeled, and seemed in the act of
falling to the earth. The usual sound made by spectators at the sight
of any painful or unpleasant circumstance, by drawing the breath
between the teeth, was suddenly heard to pass through the assembly,
while a female voice loud and eagerly exclaimed,--"Count Robert of
Paris!--forget not this day that thou owest a life to Heaven and me."
The Count was in the act of again seconding his blow, with what effect
could hardly be judged, when this cry reached his ears, and apparently
took away his disposition for farther combat.

"I acknowledge the debt," he said, sinking his battle-axe, and
retreating two steps from his antagonist, who stood in astonishment,
scarcely recovered from the stunning effect of the blow by which he was
so nearly prostrated. He sank the blade of his battle-axe in imitation
of his antagonist, and seemed to wait in suspense what was to be the
next process of the combat. "I acknowledge my debt," said the valiant
Count of Paris, "alike to Bertha of Britain and to the Almighty, who
has preserved me from the crime of ungrateful blood-guiltiness.--You
have seen the fight, gentlemen," turning to Tancred and his chivalry,
"and can testify, on your honour, that it has been maintained fairly on
both sides, and without advantage on either. I presume my honourable
antagonist has by this time satisfied the desire which brought me under
his challenge, and which certainly had no taste in it of personal or
private quarrel. On my part, I retain towards him such a sense of
personal obligation as would render my continuing this combat, unless
compelled to it by self-defence, a shameful and sinful action."

Alexius gladly embraced the terms of truce, which he was far from
expecting, and threw down his warder, in signal that the duel was
ended. Tancred, though somewhat surprised, and perhaps even
scandalized, that a private soldier of the Emperor's guard should have
so long resisted the utmost efforts of so approved a knight, could not
but own that the combat had been fought with perfect fairness and
equality, and decided upon terms dishonourable to neither party. The
Count's character being well known and established amongst the
crusaders, they were compelled to believe that some motive of a most
potent nature formed the principle upon which, very contrary to his
general practice, he had proposed a cessation of the combat before it
was brought to a deadly, or at least to a decisive conclusion. The
edict of the Emperor upon the occasion, therefore, passed into a law,
acknowledged by the assent of the chiefs present, and especially
affirmed and gratulated by the shouts of the assembled spectators.

But perhaps the most interesting figure in the assembly was that of the
bold Varangian, arrived so suddenly at a promotion of military renown,
which the extreme difficulty he had experienced in keeping his ground
against Count Robert had prevented him from anticipating, although his
modesty had not diminished the indomitable courage with which he
maintained the contest. He stood in the middle of the lists, his face
ruddy with the exertion of the combat, and not less so from the modest
consciousness proper to the plainness and simplicity of his character,
which was disconcerted by finding himself the central point of the gaze
of the multitude.

"Speak to me, my soldier," said Alexius, strongly affected by the
gratitude which he felt was due to Hereward upon so singular an
occasion, "speak to thine Emperor as his superior, for such thou art at
this moment, and tell him if there is any manner, even at the expense
of half his kingdom, to atone for his own life saved, and, what is yet
dearer, for the honour of his country, which thou hast so manfully
defended and preserved?"

"My Lord," answered Hereward, "your Imperial Highness values my poor
services over highly, and ought to attribute them to the noble Count of
Paris, first, for his condescending to accept of an antagonist so mean
in quality as myself; and next, in generously relinquishing victory
when he might have achieved it by an additional blow; for I here
confess before your Majesty, my brethren, and the assembled Grecians,
that my power of protracting the combat was ended, when the gallant
Count, by his generosity, put a stop to it."

"Do not thyself that wrong, brave man," said Count Robert; "for I vow
to our Lady of the Broken Lances, that the combat was yet within the
undetermined doom of Providence, when the pressure of my own feelings
rendered me incapable of continuing it, to the necessary harm, perhaps
to the mortal damage, of an antagonist to whom I owe so much kindness.
Choose, therefore, the recompense which the generosity of thy Emperor
offers in a manner so just and grateful, and fear not lest mortal voice
pronounces that reward unmerited which Robert of Paris shall avouch
with his sword to have been gallantly won upon his own crest."

"You are too great, my lord, and too noble," answered the Anglo-Saxon,
"to be gainsaid by such as I am, and I must not awaken new strife
between us by contesting the circumstances under which our combat so
suddenly closed, nor would it be wise or prudent in me further to
contradict you. My noble Emperor generously offers me the right of
naming what he calls my recompense; but let not his generosity be
dispraised, although it is from you, my lord, and not from his Imperial
Highness, that I am to ask a boon, to me the dearest to which my voice
can give utterance."

"And that," said the Count, "has reference to Bertha, the faithful
attendant of my wife?"

"Even so," said Hereward; "it is my proposal to request my discharge
from the Varangian guard, and permission to share in your lordship's
pious and honourable vow for the recovery of Palestine, with liberty to
fight under your honoured banner, and permission from time to time to
recommend my love-suit to Bertha, the attendant of the Countess of
Paris, and the hope that it may find favour in the eyes of her noble
lord and lady. I may thus finally hope to be restored to a country,
which I have never ceased to love over the rest of the world."

"Thy service, noble soldier," said the Count, "shall be as acceptable
to me as that of a born earl; nor is there an opportunity of acquiring
honour which I can shape for thee, to which, as it occurs, I will not
gladly prefer thee. I will not boast of what interest I have with the
King of England, but something I can do with him, and it shall be
strained to the uttermost to settle thee in thine own beloved native
country."

The Emperor then spoke. "Bear witness, heaven and earth, and you my
faithful subjects, and you my gallant allies; above all, you my bold
and true Varangian Guard, that we would rather have lost the brightest
jewel from our Imperial crown, than have relinquished the service of
this true and faithful Anglo-Saxon. But since go he must and will, it
shall be my study to distinguish him by such marks of beneficence as
may make it known through his future life, that he is the person to
whom the Emperor Alexius Comnenus acknowledged a debt larger than his
empire could discharge. You, my Lord Tancred, and your principal
leaders, will sup with us this evening, and to-morrow resume your
honourable and religious purpose of pilgrimage. We trust both the
combatants will also oblige us by their presence.--Trumpets, give the
signal for dismission."

The trumpets sounded accordingly, and the different classes of
spectators, armed and unarmed, broke up into various parties, or formed
into their military ranks, for the purpose of their return to the city.

The screams of women suddenly and strangely raised, was the first thing
that arrested the departure of the multitude, when those who glanced
their eyes back, saw Sylvan, the great ourang-outang, produce himself
in the lists, to their surprise and astonishment. The women, and many
of the men who were present, unaccustomed to the ghastly look and
savage appearance of a creature so extraordinary, raised a yell of
terror so loud, that it discomposed the animal who was the occasion of
its being raised. Sylvan, in the course of the night, having escaped
over the garden-wall of Agelastes, and clambered over the rampart of
the city, found no difficulty in hiding himself in the lists which were
in the act of being raised, having found a lurking-place in some dark
corner under the seats of the spectators. From this he was probably
dislodged by the tumult of the dispersing multitude, and had been
compelled, therefore, to make an appearance in public when he least
desired it, not unlike that of the celebrated Puliccinello, at the
conclusion of his own drama, when he enters in mortal strife with the
foul fiend himself, a scene which scarcely excites more terror among
the juvenile audience, than did the unexpected apparition of Sylvan
among the spectators of the duel. Bows were bent, and javelins pointed
by the braver part of the soldiery, against an animal of an appearance
so ambiguous, and whom his uncommon size and grizzly look caused most
who beheld him to suppose either the devil himself, or the apparition
of some fiendish deity of ancient days, whom the heathens worshipped.
Sylvan had so far improved such opportunities as had been afforded him,
as to become sufficiently aware that the attitudes assumed by so many
military men, inferred immediate danger to his person, from which he
hastened to shelter himself by flying to the protection of Hereward,
with whom he had been in some degree familiarized. He seized him,
accordingly, by the cloak, and, by the absurd and alarmed look of his
fantastic features, and a certain wild and gibbering chatter,
endeavoured to express his fear and to ask protection. Hereward
understood the terrified creature, and turning to the Emperor's throne,
said aloud,--"Poor frightened being, turn thy petition, and gestures,
and tones, to a quarter which, having to-day pardoned so many offences
which were wilfully and maliciously schemed, will not be, I am sure,
obdurate to such as thou, in thy half-reasoning capacity, may have been
capable of committing."

The creature, as is the nature of its tribe, caught from Hereward
himself the mode of applying with most effect his gestures and pitiable
supplication, while the Emperor, notwithstanding the serious scene
which had just past, could not help laughing at the touch of comedy
flung into it by this last incident.

"My trusty Hereward,"--he said aside, ("I will not again call him
Edward if I can help it)--thou art the refuge of the distressed,
whether it be man or beast, and nothing that sues through thy
intercession, while thou remainest in our service, shall find its
supplication in vain. Do thou, good Hereward," for the name was now
pretty well established in his Imperial memory, "and such of thy
companions as know the habits of the creature, lead him back to his old
quarters in the Blacquernal; and that done, my friend, observe that we
request thy company, and that of thy faithful mate Bertha, to partake
supper at our court, with our wife and daughter, and such of our
servants and allies as we shall request to share the same honour. Be
assured, that while thou remainest with us, there is no point of
dignity which shall not be willingly paid to thee.--And do thou
approach, Achilles Tatius, as much favoured by thine Emperor as before
this day dawned. What charges are against thee have been only whispered
in a friendly ear, which remembers them not, unless (which Heaven
forefend!) their remembrance is renewed by fresh offences."

Achilles Tatius bowed till the plume of his helmet mingled with the
mane of his fiery horse, but held it wisest to forbear any answer in
words, leaving his crime and his pardon to stand upon those general
terms in which the Emperor had expressed them.

Once more the multitude of all ranks returned on their way to the city,
nor did any second interruption arrest their march. Sylvan, accompanied
by one or two Varangians, who led him in a sort of captivity, took his
way to the vaults of the Blacquernal, which were in fact his proper
habitation.

Upon the road to the city, Harpax, the notorious corporal of the
Immortal Guards, held a discourse with one or two of his own soldiers,
and of the citizens who had been members of the late conspiracy.

"So," said Stephanos, the prize-fighter, "a fine affair we have made of
it, to suffer ourselves to be all anticipated and betrayed by a
thick-sculled Varangian; every chance turning against us as they would
against Corydon, the shoemaker, if he were to defy me to the circus.
Ursel, whose death made so much work, turns out not to be dead after
all; and what is worse, he lives not to our advantage. This fellow
Hereward, who was yesterday no better than myself--What do I
say?--better!--he was a great deal worse--an insignificant nobody in
every respect!--is now crammed with honours, praises, and gifts, till
he wellnigh returns what they have given him, and the Caesar and the
Acolyte, our associates, have lost the Emperor's love and confidence,
and if they are suffered to survive, it must be like the tame domestic
poultry, whom we pamper with food, one day, that upon the next their
necks may be twisted for spit or spot."

"Stephanos," replied the centurion, "thy form of body fits thee well
for the Palaestra, but thy mind is not so acutely formed as to detect
that which is real from that which is only probable, in the political
world, of which thou art now judging. Considering the risk incurred by
lending a man's ear to a conspiracy, thou oughtest to reckon it a
saving in every particular, where he escapes with his life and
character safe. This has been the case with Achilles Tatius, and with
the Caesar. They have remained also in their high places of trust and
power, and maybe confident that the Emperor will hardly dare to remove
them at a future period, since the possession of the full knowledge of
their guilt has not emboldened him to do so. Their power, thus left
with them, is in fact ours; nor is there a circumstance to be supposed,
which can induce them to betray their confederates to the government.
It is much more likely that they will remember them with the
probability of renewing, at a finer time, the alliance which binds them
together. Cheer up thy noble resolution, therefore, my Prince of the
Circus, and think that thou shalt still retain that predominant
influence which the favourites of the amphitheatre are sure to possess
over the citizens of Constantinople."

"I cannot tell," answered Stephanos; "but it gnaws at my heart like the
worm that dieth not, to see this beggarly foreigner betray the noblest
blood in the land, not to mention the best athlete in the Palaestra,
and move off not only without punishment for his treachery, but with
praise, honour, and preferment."

"True," said Harpax; "but observe, my friend, that he does move off to
purpose. He leaves the land, quits the corps in which he might claim
preferment and a few vain honours, being valued at what such trifles
amount to. Hereward, in the course of one or two days, shall be little
better than a disbanded soldier, subsisting by the poor bread which he
can obtain as a follower of this beggarly Count, or which he is rather
bound to dispute with the infidel, by encountering with his battle-axe
the Turkish sabres. What will it avail him amidst the disasters, the
slaughter, and the famine of Palestine, that he once upon a time was
admitted to supper with the Emperor? We know Alexius Comnenus---he is
willing to discharge, at the highest cost, such obligations as are
incurred to men like this Hereward; and, believe me, I think that I see
the wily despot shrug his shoulders in derision, when one morning he is
saluted with the news of a battle in Palestine lost by the crusaders in
which his old acquaintance has fallen a dead man. I will not insult
thee, by telling thee how easy it might be to acquire the favour of a
gentlewoman in waiting upon a lady of quality; nor do I think it would
be difficult, should that be the object of the prize-fighter, to
acquire the property of a large baboon like Sylvan, which no doubt
would set up as a juggler any Frank who had meanness of spirit to
propose to gain his bread in such a capacity, from the alms of the
starving chivalry of Europe. But he who can stoop to envy the lot of
such a person, ought not to be one whose chief personal distinctions
are sufficient to place him first in rank over all the favourites of
the amphitheatre."

There was something in this sophistical kind of reasoning, which was
but half satisfactory to the obtuse intellect of the prize-fighter, to
whom it was addressed, although the only answer which he attempted was
couched in this observation:--

"Ay, but, noble centurion, you forget that, besides empty honours, this
Varangian Hereward, or Edward, whichever is his name, is promised a
mighty donative of gold."

"Marry, you touch me there," said the centurion; "and when you tell me
that the promise is fulfilled, I will willingly agree that the
Anglo-Saxon hath gained something to be envied for; but while it
remains in the shape of a naked promise, you shall pardon me, my worthy
Stephanos, if I hold it of no more account than the mere pledges which
are distributed among ourselves as well as to the Varangians, promising
upon future occasions mints of money, which we are likely to receive at
the same time with the last year's snow. Keep up your heart, therefore,
noble Stephanos, and believe not that your affairs are worse for the
miscarriage of this day; and let not thy gallant courage sink, but
remembering those principles upon which it was called into action,
believe that thy objects are not the less secure because fate has
removed their acquisition to a more distant day." The veteran and
unbending conspirator, Harpax, thus strengthened for some future
renewal of their enterprise the failing spirits of Stephanos.

After this, such leaders as were included in the invitation given by
the Emperor, repaired to the evening meal, and, from the general
content and complaisance expressed by Alexius and his guests of every
description, it could little have been supposed that the day just
passed over was one which had inferred a purpose so dangerous and
treacherous.

The absence of the Countess Brenhilda, during this eventful day,
created no small surprise to the Emperor and those in his immediate
confidence, who knew her enterprising spirit, and the interest she must
have felt in the issue of the combat. Bertha had made an early
communication to the Count, that his lady, agitated with the many
anxieties of the few preceding days, was unable to leave her apartment.
The valiant knight, therefore, lost no time in acquainting his faithful
Countess of his safety; and afterwards joining those who partook of the
banquet at the palace, he bore himself as if the least recollection did
not remain on his mind of the perfidious conduct of the Emperor at the
conclusion of the last entertainment. He knew, in truth, that the
knights of Prince Tancred not only maintained a strict watch round the
house where Brenhilda remained, but also that they preserved a severe
ward in the neighbourhood of the Blacquernal, as well for the safety of
their heroic leader, as for that of Count Robert, the respected
companion of their military pilgrimage.

It was the general principle of the European chivalry, that distrust
was rarely permitted to survive open quarrels, and that whatever was
forgiven, was dismissed from their recollection, as unlikely to recur;
but on the present occasion there was a more than usual assemblage of
troops, which the occurrences of the day had drawn together, so that
the crusaders were called upon to be particularly watchful.

It may be believed that the evening passed over without any attempt to
renew the ceremonial in the council chamber of the Lions, which had
been upon a former occasion terminated in such misunderstanding. Indeed
it would have been lucky if the explanation between the mighty Emperor
of Greece and the chivalrous Knight of Paris had taken place earlier;
for reflection on what had passed, had convinced the Emperor that the
Franks were not a people to be imposed upon by pieces of clockwork, and
similar trifles, and that what they did not understand, was sure,
instead of procuring their awe or admiration, to excite their anger and
defiance. Nor had it altogether escaped Count Robert, that the manners
of the Eastern people were upon a different scale from those to which
he had been accustomed; that they neither were so deeply affected by
the spirit of chivalry, nor, in his own language, was the worship of
the Lady of the Broken Lances so congenial a subject of adoration. This
notwithstanding, Count Robert observed, that Alexius Comnenus was a
wise and politic prince; his wisdom perhaps too much allied to cunning,
but yet aiding him to maintain with great address that empire over the
minds of his subjects, which was necessary for their good, and for
maintaining his own authority. He therefore resolved to receive with
equanimity whatever should be offered by the Emperor, either in
civility or in the way of jest, and not again to disturb an
understanding which might be of advantage to Christendom, by a quarrel
founded upon misconception of terms or misapprehension of manners. To
this prudent resolution the Count of Paris adhered during the whole
evening; with some difficulty, however, since it was somewhat
inconsistent with his own fiery and inquisitive temper, which was
equally desirous to know the precise amount of whatever was addressed
to him, and to take umbrage at it, should it appear in the least degree
offensive, whether so intended or not.




CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FOURTH.


It was not until after the conquest of Jerusalem that Count Robert of
Paris returned to Constantinople, and with his wife, and such
proportion of his followers as the sword and pestilence had left after
that bloody warfare, resumed his course to his native kingdom. Upon
reaching Italy, the first care of the noble Count and Countess was to
celebrate in princely style the marriage of Hereward and his faithful
Bertha, who had added to their other claims upon their master and
mistress, those acquired by Hereward's faithful services in Palestine,
and no less by Bertha's affectionate ministry to her lady in
Constantinople.

As to the fate of Alexius Comnenus, it may be read at large in the
history of his daughter Anna, who has represented him as the hero of
many a victory, achieved, says the purple-born, in the third chapter
and fifteenth book of her history, sometimes by his arms and sometimes
by his prudence.

"His boldness alone has gained some battles, at other times his success
has been won by stratagem. He has erected the most illustrious of his
trophies by confronting danger, by combating like a simple soldier, and
throwing himself bareheaded into the thickest of the foe. But there are
others," continues the accomplished lady, "which he gained an
opportunity of erecting by assuming the appearance of terror, and even
of retreat. In a word, he knew alike how to triumph either in flight or
in pursuit, and remained upright even before those enemies who appeared
to have struck him down; resembling the military implement termed the
calthrop, which remains always upright in whatever direction it is
thrown on the ground."

It would be unjust to deprive the Princess of the defence she herself
makes against the obvious charge of partiality.

"I must still once more repel the reproach which some bring against me,
as if my history was composed merely according to the dictates of the
natural love for parents which is engraved in the hearts of children.
In truth, it is not the effect of that affection which I bear to mine,
but it is the evidence of matter of fact, which obliges me to speak as
I have done. Is it not possible that one can have at the same time an
affection for the memory of a father and for truth? For myself, I have
never directed my attempt to write history, otherwise than for the
ascertainment of the matter of fact. With this purpose, I have taken
for my subject the history of a worthy man. Is it just, that, by the
single accident of his being the author of my birth, his quality of my
father ought to form a prejudice against me, which would ruin my credit
with my readers? I have given, upon other occasions, proofs
sufficiently strong of the ardour which I had for the defence of my
father's interests, which those that know me can never doubt but, on
the present, I have been limited by the inviolable fidelity with which
I respect the truth, which I should have felt conscience to have
veiled, under pretence of serving the renown of my father."--_Alexiad_,
chap. iii. book xv.

This much we have deemed it our duty to quote, in justice to the fair
historian; we will extract also her description of the Emperor's death,
and are not unwilling to allow, that the character assigned to the
Princess by our own Gibbon, has in it a great deal of fairness and of
truth.

Notwithstanding her repeated protests of sacrificing rather to the
exact and absolute truth than to the memory of her deceased parent,
Gibbon remarks truly, that "instead of the simplicity of style and
narrative which wins a belief, an elaborate affectation of rhetoric and
science betrays in every page the vanity of a female author. The
genuine character of Alexius is lost in a vague constellation of
virtues; and the perpetual strain of panegyric and apology awakens our
jealousy to question the veracity of the historian, and the merit of
the hero. We cannot, however, refuse her judicious and important
remark, that the disorders of the times were the misfortune and the
glory of Alexius; and that every calamity which can afflict a declining
empire was accumulated on his reign by the justice of Heaven and the
vices of his predecessors."--GIBBON'S _Roman Empire_, vol. ix. p. 83,
foot-note.

The Princess accordingly feels the utmost assurance, that a number of
signs which appeared in heaven and on earth, were interpreted by the
soothsayers of the day as foreboding the death of the Emperor. By these
means, Anna Comnena assigned to her father those indications of
consequence, which ancient historians represent as necessary
intimations of the sympathy of nature, with the removal of great
characters from the world; but she fails not to inform the Christian
reader that her father's belief attached to none of these prognostics,
and that even on the following remarkable occasion he maintained his
incredulity:--A splendid statue, supposed generally to be a relic of
paganism, holding in its hand a golden sceptre, and standing upon a
base of porphyry, was overturned by a tempest, and was generally
believed to be an intimation of the death of the Emperor. This,
however, he generously repelled. Phidias, he said, and other great
sculptors of antiquity, had the talent of imitating the human frame
with surprising accuracy; but to suppose that the power of foretelling
future events was reposed in these master-pieces of art, would be to
ascribe to their makers the faculties reserved by the Deity for
himself, when he says, "It is I who kill and make alive." During his
latter days, the Emperor was greatly afflicted with the gout, the
nature of which has exercised the wit of many persons of science as
well as of Anna Comnena. The poor patient was so much exhausted, that
when the Empress was talking of most eloquent persons who should assist
in the composition of his history, he said, with a natural contempt of
such vanities, "The passages of my unhappy life call rather for tears
and lamentation than for the praises you speak of."

A species of asthma having come to the assistance of the gout, the
remedies of the physicians became as vain as the intercession of the
monks and clergy, as well as the alms which were indiscriminately
lavished. Two or three deep successive swoons gave ominous warning of
the approaching blow; and at length was terminated the reign and life
of Alexius Comnenus, a prince who, with all the faults which may be
imputed to him, still possesses a real right, from the purity of his
general intentions, to be accounted one of the best sovereigns of the
Lower Empire.

For some time, the historian forgot her pride of literary rank, and,
like an ordinary person, burst into tears and shrieks, tore her hair,
and defaced her countenance, while the Empress Irene cast from her her
princely habits, cut off her hair, changed her purple buskins for black
mourning shoes, and her daughter Mary, who had herself been a widow,
took a black robe from one of her own wardrobes, and presented it to
her mother. "Even in the moment when she put it on," says Anna Comnena,
"the Emperor gave up the ghost, and in that moment the sun of my life
set."

We shall not pursue her lamentations farther. She upbraids herself
that, after the death of her father, that light of the world, she had
also survived Irene, the delight alike of the east and of the west, and
survived her husband also. "I am indignant," she said, "that my soul,
suffering under such torrents of misfortune, should still deign to
animate my body. Have I not," said she, "been more hard and unfeeling
than the rocks themselves; and is it not just that one, who could
survive such a father and mother, and such a husband, should be
subjected to the influence of so much calamity? But let me finish this
history, rather than any longer fatigue my readers with my unavailing
and tragical lamentation."

Having thus concluded her history, she adds the following two lines:--

    "The learned Comnena lays her pen aside,
     What time her subject and her father died." [Footnote: [Greek:
     Laexen hopou biotoio Alexios d Komnaenos
     Entha kalae thygataer laexen Alexiados.]]

These quotations will probably give the readers as much as they wish to
know of the real character of this Imperial historian. Fewer words will
suffice to dispose of the other parties who have been selected from her
pages, as persons in the foregoing drama.

There is very little doubt that the Count Robert of Paris, whose
audacity in seating himself upon the throne of the Emperor gives a
peculiar interest to his character, was in fact a person of the highest
rank; being no other, as has been conjectured by the learned Du Cange,
than an ancestor of the house of Bourbon, which has so long given Kings
to France. He was a successor, it has been conceived, of the Counts of
Paris, by whom the city was valiantly defended against the Normans, and
an ancestor of Hugh Capet. There are several hypotheses upon this
subject, deriving the well-known Hugh Capet, first, from the family of
Saxony; secondly, from St. Arnoul, afterwards Bishop of Altex; third,
from Nibilong; fourth, from the Duke of Bavaria; and fifth, from a
natural son of the Emperor Charlemagne. Variously placed, but in each
of these contested pedigrees, appears this Robert surnamed the
_Strong_, who was Count of that district, of which Paris was the
capital, most peculiarly styled the County, or Isle of France. Anna
Comnena, who has recorded the bold usurpation of the Emperor's seat by
this haughty chieftain, has also acquainted us with his receiving a
severe, if not a mortal wound, at the battle of Dorylseum, owing to his
neglecting the warlike instructions with which her father had favoured
him on the subject of the Turkish wars. The antiquary who is disposed
to investigate this subject, may consult the late Lord Ashburnham's
elaborate Genealogy of the Royal House of France; also a note of Du
Cange's on the Princess's history, p. 362, arguing for the identity of
her "Robert of Paris, a haughty barbarian," with the "Robert called the
Strong," mentioned as an ancestor of Hugh Capet. Gibbon, vol. xi. p.
52, may also be consulted. The French antiquary and the English
historian seem alike disposed to find the church, called in the tale
that of the Lady of the Broken Lances, in that dedicated to St. Drusas,
or Drosin of Soissons, who was supposed to have peculiar influence on
the issue of combats, and to be in the habit of determining them in
favour of such champions as spent the night preceding at his shrine.

In consideration of the sex of one of the parties concerned, the author
has selected our Lady of the Broken Lances as a more appropriate
patroness than St. Drusas himself, for the Amazons, who were not
uncommon in that age. Gaita, for example, the wife of Robert Guiscard,
a redoubted hero, and the parent of a most heroic race of sons, was
herself an Amazon, fought in the foremost ranks of the Normans, and is
repeatedly commemorated by our Imperial historian, Anna Comnena.

The reader can easily conceive to himself that Robert of Paris
distinguished himself among his brethren-at-arms and fellow-crusaders.
His fame resounded from the walls of Antioch; but at the battle of
Dorylaeum, he was so desperately wounded, as to be disabled from taking
a part in the grandest scene of the expedition. His heroic Countess,
however, enjoyed the great satisfaction of mounting the walls of
Jerusalem, and in so far discharging her own vows and those of her
husband. This was the more fortunate, as the sentence of the physicians
pronounced that the wounds of the Count had been inflicted by a
poisoned weapon, and that complete recovery was only to be hoped for by
having recourse to his native air. After some time spent in the vain
hope of averting by patience this unpleasant alternative, Count Robert
subjected himself to necessity, or what was represented as such, and,
with his wife and the faithful Hereward, and all others of his
followers who had been like himself disabled from combat, took the way
to Europe by sea.

A light galley, procured at a high rate, conducted them safely to
Venice, and from that then glorious city, the moderate portion of spoil
which had fallen to the Count's share among the conquerors of
Palestine, served to convey them to his own dominions, which, more
fortunate than those of most of his fellow-pilgrims, had been left
uninjured by their neighbours during the time of their proprietor's
absence on the Crusade. The report that the Count had lost his health,
and the power of continuing his homage to the Lady of the Broken
Lances, brought upon him the hostilities of one or two ambitious or
envious neighbours, whose covetousness was, however, sufficiently
repressed by the brave resistance of the Countess and the resolute
Hereward. Less than a twelvemonth was required to restore the Count of
Paris to his full health, and to render him, as formerly, the assured
protector of his own vassals, and the subject in whom the possessors of
the French throne reposed the utmost confidence. This latter capacity
enabled Count Robert to discharge his debt towards Hereward in a manner
as ample as he could have hoped or expected. Being now respected alike
for his wisdom and his sagacity, as much as he always was for his
intrepidity and his character as a successful crusader, he was
repeatedly employed by the Court of France in settling the troublesome
and intricate affairs in which the Norman possessions of the English
crown involved the rival nations. William Rufus was not insensible to
his merit, nor blind to the importance of gaining his good will; and
finding out his anxiety that Hereward should be restored to the land of
his fathers, he took, or made an opportunity, by the forfeiture of some
rebellious noble, of conferring upon our Varangian a large district
adjacent to the New Forest, being part of the scenes which his father
chiefly frequented, and where it is said the descendants of the valiant
squire and his Bertha have subsisted for many a long year, surviving
turns of time and chance, which are in general fatal to the continuance
of more distinguished families.


